Discurso 1
==================================================
April 04, 2025
Economic Outlook
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Society for Advancing Business Editing and Writing Annual Conference, Arlington, Virginia
Share
Watch Live
Thank you for having me here today. Monetary policy is more effective when the public understands what we are doing and why. Through your work, journalists like you help promote that greater understanding. I am sure this room full of reporters does not lack for questions to ask. Before addressing a few of those, I will briefly summarize the outlook for the economy and monetary policy.
At the Fed, we are squarely focused on achieving the dual-mandate goals Congress has given us of maximum employment and stable prices. While uncertainty is high and downside risks have risen, the economy is still in a good place. The incoming data show solid growth, a labor market in balance, and inflation running much closer to, but still above, our 2 percent objective.
Recent Economic Data
After a couple of years of solid growth, many forecasters have anticipated somewhat slower growth this year. The initial reading for first-quarter GDP will be released later this month. The limited hard data are consistent with a slower but still solid growth outlook. At the same time, surveys of households and businesses report dimming expectations and higher uncertainty about the outlook. Survey respondents point to the effects of new federal policies, especially related to trade. We are closely watching this tension between the hard and soft data. As the new policies and their likely economic effects become clearer, we will have a better sense of their implications for the economy and for monetary policy.
Looking across many indicators, the labor market appears to be broadly in balance and is not a significant source of inflationary pressure. This morning's jobs report shows the unemployment rate at 4.2
percent in March, still in the low range where it has held since early last year. Over the first quarter, payrolls grew by an average of 150,000
jobs a month. The combination of low layoffs, moderating job growth, and slowing labor force growth has kept the unemployment rate broadly stable.
Turning to the other leg of our dual mandate, inflation has declined sharply from its pandemic highs of mid-2022. It has done so without the kind of painful rise in unemployment that has often accompanied periods of tight monetary policy that are needed to reduce inflation. More recently, progress toward our 2 percent inflation objective has slowed. Total PCE prices rose 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in February. Core PCE prices, which exclude the volatile food and energy categories, rose 2.8 percent. Looking ahead, higher tariffs will be working their way through our economy and are likely to raise inflation in coming quarters. Reflecting this, both survey- and market-based measures of near-term inflation expectations have moved up. By most measures, longer-term inflation expectations—those beyond the next few years—remain well anchored and consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal. We remain committed to returning inflation sustainably to our 2 percent objective.
Monetary Policy
Turning to monetary policy, we face a highly uncertain outlook with elevated risks of both higher unemployment and higher inflation. The new Administration is in the process of implementing substantial policy changes in four distinct areas: trade, immigration, fiscal policy, and regulation. Our monetary policy stance is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties we face as we gain a better understanding of the policy changes and their likely effects on the economy. It is not our role to comment on those policies. Rather, we make an assessment of their likely effects, observe the behavior of the economy, and set monetary policy in a way that best achieves our dual-mandate goals.
We have stressed that it will be very difficult to assess the likely economic effects of higher tariffs until there is greater certainty about the details, such as what will be tariffed, at what level and for what duration, and the extent of retaliation from our trading partners. While uncertainty remains elevated, it is now becoming clear that the tariff increases will be significantly larger than expected. The same is likely to be true of the economic effects, which will include higher inflation and slower growth. The size and duration of these effects remain uncertain. While tariffs are highly likely to generate at least a temporary rise in inflation, it is also possible that the effects could be more persistent. Avoiding that outcome would depend on keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored, on the size of the effects, and on how long it takes for them to pass through fully to prices. Our obligation is to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored and to make certain that a one-time increase in the price level does not become an ongoing inflation problem.
We will continue to carefully monitor the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. We are well positioned to wait for greater clarity before considering any adjustments to our policy stance. It is too soon to say what will be the appropriate path for monetary policy.
Conclusion
We understand the benefits of a solid economy where workers can find jobs and inflation is low and predictable. We also understand that elevated levels of unemployment or inflation can be damaging and painful for communities, families, and businesses. That is why we at the Fed will continue to do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.


Discurso 2
==================================================
April 03, 2025
U.S. Economic Outlook and Central Bank Communications
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At “Financial Intermediaries, Markets, and Monetary Policy,” a conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the University of Virginia Darden School of Business, Atlanta, Georgia
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Dr. Tkac, for your kind words and for the opportunity to talk to this group.
1
It is always wonderful to be back in Georgia and here at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. And it is an honor to speak at a conference co-organized by the University of Virginia, where I received my Ph.D.
Title Slide
You have heard already today about financial markets and the banking system. To add to that picture, I would like to share with you my outlook for the U.S. economy and my views of appropriate monetary policy. But before that, I want to touch on the importance of central bank communications, and particularly the evolution of Fed communications.
The Value of Communications
One of the reasons I so appreciate the opportunity to speak at events like this is because speeches are an important part of how the Federal Reserve delivers on its mission to the American people. Like my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), I enjoy engaging regularly with people from around the country to hear about on-the-ground economic conditions and to learn specifics about industries and communities. Such engagement is also a pathway to delivering better policy. It is important that households, businesses, and financial markets understand policymakers' views and assessments of economic conditions.
Monetary policy is transmitted to the rest of the economy through financial market prices, such as long-term interest rates, which in turn affect the decisions of households and businesses. Changes in the target range for the federal funds rate are transmitted to short-term interest rates through arbitrage relationships. Short-term interest rates and central bank communication, in turn, affect long-term interest rates through investors' expectations. According to the expectations theory of the term structure of interest rates, intermediate- and long-term interest rates are the weighted average of expected future short-term interest rates. In addition, monetary policy affects risk premiums. Tighter monetary policy tends to reduce the willingness of investors to bear risk, making them less willing to invest in long-term assets, which means that their return should be higher for investors to buy these assets.
Former Fed Chair Ben Bernanke nicely summarized how important central bank communication is for the transmission of monetary policy by saying that "monetary policy is 98 percent talk and only two percent action."
2
While obviously hyperbole, the point is meaningful. Clear communication is an important part of a Fed policymaker's job.
Today the Fed communicates in a variety of ways, including policymaker speeches, Chair Powell's press conferences, and even through the Fed's social media channels. Clear and ample communication, however, has not always been the hallmark of the Fed. In the 1990s, cable news outlets would attempt to spot former Fed Chair Alan Greenspan walking into the building on the day of FOMC meetings. Commentators would pay careful attention to the size of his briefcase.
3
The thought was that if the Chair was advocating a rate change, the briefcase would be bulging with documents to convince fellow policymakers. A light bag, on the contrary, would have signaled that a
status quo
policy decision was likely. Former Chair Greenspan seemed to value the element of surprise. In 1987, he famously quipped, "If I seem unduly clear to you, you must have misunderstood what I said."
4
That said, during his tenure in later years, he initiated substantial changes in how Fed policymakers communicate with the public.
Figure 1
shows a timeline of the steps taken toward increasing transparency at the Fed since the 1990s. Beginning in 1993, the Fed started to publish FOMC meeting minutes in their current form at the next meeting. Soon after that, the Committee began releasing full transcripts of what was said at the meetings with a five-year lag. The next year, the FOMC started to issue statements following meetings at which there was a change in the policy stance. Before such public statements, Fed watchers would need to observe movements in markets to determine if a policy change was being implemented. In subsequent years, the target federal funds rate was incorporated into these statements, and then, in 1999, the FOMC started to publish statements after every meeting, regardless of whether there was a policy change. In 2004, the FOMC accelerated the release of the minutes to three weeks after the meeting. The Fed's transparency increased further under former Chair Bernanke. In November 2007, the FOMC began releasing the Summary of Economic Projections, commonly known as the SEP, which, as you may know, is a compilation of individual policymakers' forecasts for output, unemployment, and inflation. Since 2012, the SEP has also included information about policymakers' projections of appropriate monetary policy, known as the dot plot. Former Chair Bernanke started holding press conferences after every other FOMC meeting in 2011. In 2012, the FOMC published the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which is known as the consensus statement. That statement articulates the FOMC's framework for the conduct of monetary policy in pursuit of the dual-mandate goals assigned by Congress: maximum employment and price stability. And since then, the FOMC has undertaken periodic public reviews of that statement. Under Chair Powell's tenure, starting in 2019, the Chair's press conferences have been held after every FOMC meeting.
Of course, the Chair and other policymakers also regularly testify before Congress, as required by law. And the Fed releases many reports and data, including the
Monetary Policy Report,
the
Financial Stability Report,
and the
Supervision and Regulation Report.
Policymakers' public appearances also help inform the public about the Fed's goals and its strategies to achieve those goals.
Communication is not just about talking; it is also about listening. Policymakers listen to the steady beat of economic data, and the Board and the Reserve Banks conduct numerous surveys of financial market participants, businesses, and families. Some of what we hear is summarized in the Beige Book, published eight times per year. I also listen to experts and the public at events like this and
Fed Listens
events, several of which are planned for later this year.
Today, it is widely accepted that clear communication contributes greatly to effective transmission of monetary policy, especially because clear communication can affect the expected path of interest rates and financial conditions more generally. Former Cleveland Fed President Loretta Mester studied this issue closely and discussed that when policymakers are clear about their policy goals, aspects of the economy that can and cannot be influenced by monetary policy, and the economic information that influences their forecasts and policy decisions, the public will have a better understanding of monetary policy.
5
The public can then incorporate that information into their saving, borrowing, employment, and investment decisions.
Economic Outlook
So, in that spirit of making sure the public is well informed, I will now share with you my outlook for the U.S. economy. Over the past two years, significant progress has been made toward the Fed's dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. Labor market conditions are solid, and inflation has come down, though it remains somewhat elevated relative to our 2 percent goal. While the economy is in a solid position, surveys of consumers and businesses show heightened uncertainty about the economic outlook. It remains to be seen what these surveys imply about future spending and investment and the direction of the economy more broadly.
Economic Activity
The economy expanded at a solid pace at the end of last year with gross domestic product (GDP) rising at a 2.4 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter, extending a period of steady growth, as you can see in
figure 2
. While Fed policymakers and many private-sector forecasters expect growth to continue, they broadly anticipate a slower pace of expansion this year. In the SEP released after the March FOMC meeting, the median participant projected GDP to rise 1.7 percent this year and to move up a bit below 2 percent over the next two years.
Resilient consumer spending has been the driving force of the current economic expansion. More recently, a few signs have emerged that suggest that some of the factors supporting last year's strong spending growth may be weakening. As you can see in
figure 3
, retail and food service sales rose 0.2 percent in February after falling a sharp 1.2 percent in January. That slower pace of spending could reflect seasonality, poor weather, and expected cooling after the strong spending at the end of last year. Nonetheless, the readings at the start of this year suggest less support for growth from household spending in the first quarter. The most recent Beige Book stated that contacts reported consumer spending was lower, on balance, with still solid demand for essential goods but increased price sensitivity for discretionary items, particularly among lower-income shoppers.
6
Industrial production has increased for three straight months, including a 0.7 percent advance in February, which was led by a rise in manufacturing output, particularly motor vehicles. Like consumer sentiment, however, readings on business sentiment have also slipped. The Beige Book reported some increases in manufacturing activity, though it noted concerns raised by firms, including chemical products and office equipment makers, about the potential effect of changes to trade policy. Some manufacturing contacts in this region, the Sixth District, said that they expected demand to improve over the next 12 months but also noted risks around policy changes and global uncertainty.
If uncertainty persists or worsens, economic activity may be constrained. An important lesson learned in recent years, however, is that American consumers have been resilient, and negative sentiment reported in surveys often does not translate into a slowdown in actual activity.
Labor Market
With respect to the labor market, conditions remain solid. The unemployment rate has remained low and was 4.1 percent in February. As you can see in
figure 4
, it has remained in a narrow range for the past year, consistent with broader evidence that labor market conditions have stabilized. That said, I anticipate that there could be some modest softening in the labor market this year. In the SEP projections, the median FOMC participant expected the unemployment rate to be 4.4 percent at the end of this year and 4.3 percent over the next two years.
Payroll job gains have averaged nearly 200,000 per month over the past six months, through February. We will, of course, get additional data tomorrow with the March jobs report. The pace of job gains has cooled from its post-pandemic peak, but layoffs remain low.
Figure 5
shows that new applications for unemployment benefits are largely holding steady this year and running at rates consistent with pre-pandemic levels. Low layoffs are a reason why the unemployment rate has been steady even as hiring has moderated. Recently, there has been an increase in former federal government employees seeking unemployment benefits and some uptick in claims filings in certain regions affected by those layoffs. I will be monitoring incoming data closely and remain vigilant about potential spillover effects in sectors such as education, health care, and state governments.
Looking at
figure 6
, you see that the gap between job openings and unemployed people seeking work has held steady for several months. That is another sign that the labor market is well-balanced. The gap has significantly narrowed from a peak in 2022, when the labor market was overheated. It is now consistent with 2019 readings, when the labor market was also solid and inflation low. Wages are growing faster than inflation and at a more sustainable pace than earlier in the pandemic recovery. The labor market is not a source of significant inflationary pressures.
Inflation
Inflation has come down a great deal over the past two and a half years but remains somewhat elevated relative to our 2 percent objective. Looking at inflation shown in
figure 7
, you see that the 12-month change in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index peaked at 7.2 percent in June 2022. Since then, it has come down on an uneven path. In February, overall inflation was 2.5 percent on a 12-month basis. Core PCE inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy costs, shown by the dashed red line, peaked at 5.6 percent in 2022. In February, it was 2.8 percent.
While inflation is well down from its recent peak, the latest data have largely shown it moving sideways. The median FOMC participant forecasts overall PCE inflation at 2.7 percent this year and 2.2 percent next year. In 2027, the median projection is at our 2 percent objective. The prospect of tariffs has consumers and businesses reporting that they expect higher inflation in the near term. Beyond the next year or so, however, most measures of longer-term inflation expectations remain consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal.
To better understand what is driving inflation, I think it can be helpful to look at some major components of changes in prices, as you can see in
figure 8
. Outside of food and energy, goods inflation was negative last year, helping to support overall disinflation. In more recent months, goods inflation has turned positive. That may in part reflect trade policy or the anticipation of changes to trade policy, but capturing the exact cause is difficult. Services inflation excluding housing, the dashed red line, has moderated from its peak but remains elevated. Housing services inflation, the dotted purple line, continues to move lower. If that trend continues, it could counter somewhat stronger inflation in other categories.
Monetary Policy
In the current environment, I attach a higher degree of uncertainty to my projections than usual. The most recent SEP indicated that other FOMC participants also were quite uncertain about the outlook: A greater number of participants indicated that uncertainty around their projections of GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation was higher than average over the past 20 years compared with responses from the previous SEP round in December 2024. As I mentioned, consumer and business surveys show that much of the economic uncertainty they report is tied to recent developments in trade policy. Significant changes in trade, immigration, fiscal, and regulatory policies currently are in process. It will be crucial to evaluate the cumulative effect of these policy changes as we assess the economy and consider the path of monetary policy. Of course, at the Fed, we look at the whole of the economy and many factors that shape it.
I supported the FOMC's decision to hold rates steady at our last policy meeting in March. Growth has remained solid so far but has started to show some signs of slowing. Labor market conditions have remained stable through February, and progress on inflation has eased, but the outlook is uncertain. These conditions led me to favor holding the policy rate constant at what I view as a moderately restrictive level.
The longer-term perspective provided by
figure 9
shows that the FOMC responded to elevated inflation in the post-pandemic period by raising the policy rate 5-1/4 percentage points over about 15 months, starting in March 2022. After the Committee held the rate at that restrictive level for more than a year, progress on inflation allowed it to lower its policy rate by 1 full percentage point last year to its current level. The outcome of inflation moderating toward the 2 percent target without a large increase in unemployment was historically unusual but greatly welcomed.
Thinking about the future path of policy, I will continue to assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. As we emphasize, monetary policy is not on a preset course. If the economy remains strong and inflation does not continue to move sustainably toward 2 percent, the current policy restraint could be retained for longer. If the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, policy could be eased accordingly. In my view, there is no need to be in a hurry to make further policy rate adjustments. The current policy stance is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate.
Having provided you with my current economic outlook, I would like to conclude by circling back to where I started, with the value of central bank communication. The remainder of today's conference will touch on FOMC communications and monetary transmission, among other topics. In that sense, the remarks that I've just given may become tomorrow's data point! I appreciate the pursuit of research like that presented today, which helps us gain further insight into a wide range of topics relevant to monetary policymaking.
Thank you for your time today. I wish you a productive and informative remainder of the conference.
1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. See Ben S. Bernanke (2015), "
Inaugurating a New Blog
,"
Ben Bernanke's Blog,
March 30, paragraph 1.
Return to text
3. See William T., Gavin and Rachel J. Mandal (2000), "
Inside the Briefcase: The Art of Predicting the Federal Reserve
," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
Regional Economist,
July 1.
Return to text
4. See Binyamin Appelbaum (2012), "A Fed Focused on the Value of Clarity,"
New York Times,
December 13.
Return to text
5. See Loretta J. Mester (2018), "
The Federal Reserve and Monetary Policy Communications
," speech delivered at the Tangri Lecture at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, January 17.
Return to text
6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2025),
The Beige Book: Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions by Federal Reserve District
(PDF)
, February.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 3
==================================================
March 07, 2025
Economic Outlook
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the University of Chicago Booth School of Business 2025 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Anil. I appreciate the opportunity to speak at this forum and look forward to our discussion. I will start with some brief remarks about the economy and the path of policy.
Despite elevated levels of uncertainty, the U.S. economy continues to be in a good place. The labor market is solid, and inflation has moved closer to our 2 percent longer-run goal. At the Federal Reserve, we are intently focused on the dual-mandate goals given to us by Congress: maximum employment and stable prices.
Recent Economic Data
Economic growth
The economy has been growing at a solid pace. GDP expanded at a 2.3 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of last year, extending a period of consistent growth that has been supported by resilient consumer spending. Recent indicators point to a possible moderation in consumer spending relative to the rapid growth rate over the second half of 2024. Further, recent surveys of households and businesses point to heightened uncertainty about the economic outlook. It remains to be seen how these developments might affect future spending and investment. Sentiment readings have not been a good predictor of consumption growth in recent years. We continue to carefully monitor a variety of indicators of household and business spending.
The labor market
Many indicators show that the labor market is solid and broadly in balance. The jobs report released this morning showed employers added 151,000 jobs to payrolls in February and the unemployment rate was 4.1 percent last month. Smoothing over the month-to-month volatility, since September, employers have added a solid 191,000 jobs a month on average. The unemployment rate remains low and has held in a narrow range between 3.9 and 4.2 percent for the past year. The jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, and the quits rate has moved below pre-pandemic levels. Wages are growing faster than inflation, and at a more sustainable pace than earlier in the pandemic recovery. With wage growth moderating and labor supply and demand having moved into better balance, the labor market is not a significant source of inflationary pressure.
Inflation
Inflation has come down a long way from its mid-2022 peak above 7 percent without a sharp increase in unemployment—a historically unusual and most welcome outcome. While progress in reducing inflation has been broad based, recent readings remain somewhat above our 2 percent objective. The path to sustainably returning inflation to our target has been bumpy, and we expect that to continue. We see ongoing progress in categories that remain elevated, such as housing services and the market-based components of non-housing services. Inflation can be volatile month-to-month, and we do not overreact to one or two readings that are higher or lower than anticipated. Data released last week showed that total PCE prices rose 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in January and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.6 percent. We pay close attention to a broad range of measures of inflation expectations, and some near-term measures have recently moved up. We see this in both market- and survey-based measures, and survey respondents, both consumers and businesses, are mentioning tariffs as a driving factor. Beyond the next year or so, however, most measures of longer-term expectations remain stable and consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal.
Monetary Policy
Looking ahead, the new Administration is in the process of implementing significant policy changes in four distinct areas: trade, immigration, fiscal policy, and regulation. It is the net effect of these policy changes that will matter for the economy and for the path of monetary policy. While there have been recent developments in some of these areas, especially trade policy, uncertainty around the changes and their likely effects remains high. As we parse the incoming information, we are focused on separating the signal from the noise as the outlook evolves. We do not need to be in a hurry, and are well positioned to wait for greater clarity.
Policy is not on a preset course. If the economy remains strong but inflation does not continue to move sustainably toward 2 percent, we can maintain policy restraint for longer. If the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, we can ease policy accordingly. Our current policy stance is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate.
Conclusion
Before I conclude, I will note that at our last FOMC meeting, we began our second five-year review of our monetary policy framework. We will consider changes to our consensus statement (Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy) and to our communications as part of this review. The consensus statement articulates our framework for the conduct of monetary policy in pursuit of the goals assigned to us by Congress. We will consider lessons of the past five years and adapt our approach, where appropriate, to best serve the American people, to whom we are accountable. The 2 percent longer-run inflation goal will be retained and is not a focus of the review.
This public review will be familiar to those who followed our process five years ago. We will hold outreach events around the country involving a wide range of parties, including
Fed Listens
events. We are open to new ideas and critical feedback. We will host a research conference in Washington in May. Our intent is to wrap up the review by late summer.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.


Discurso 4
==================================================
February 21, 2025
Reading between the Lines? Textual Analysis of Central Bank Communications
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At the Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, President Daly, for organizing this conference and for the opportunity to talk to this group.
1
I have paid close attention to the papers presented at this annual conference in the past, and I look forward to today's presentations and discussion.
Slide 1
Today, I will talk about central bank communications and the use of textual analysis tools. These tools help process qualitative information that may be hard to capture in numerical forecasts. Also, they can improve our understanding of economic concepts that are otherwise difficult to measure. This topic has been covered at this conference in the past. Last year, for example, there was a paper on the program that highlighted the importance of considering the impact that speeches by the Chair of the Federal Reserve (Fed) have on asset prices when evaluating the transmission of monetary policy to the rest of the economy.
2
This paper also shows that speeches by the Vice Chair are less important than those by the Chair. So this might be a good time to catch up on your text messages! (Just kidding!)
My
talk
is organized as follows. First, I will briefly discuss central bank communication and its effect on asset prices. Next, I will discuss how recent advances in automated textual analysis may be having an impact on how the information in central bank communication is incorporated into asset prices. Then I will review how researchers and market participants use textual analysis techniques, among other techniques, to gauge who is listening to central bank communication and to understand how monetary policy is transmitted to the economy. Before concluding, I will broaden my coverage and discuss how textual analysis tools can be used to estimate difficult-to-measure concepts in economics such as uncertainty and supply chain disruptions.
These new textual analysis techniques are important to me as a policymaker because I want to understand how our communications are being heard, interpreted, understood, and acted upon.
Central Bank Communication and its Effect on Financial Markets
Former Fed Chair Ben Bernanke often highlighted the importance of central bank communication, saying that "monetary policy is 98 percent talk and 2 percent action."
3
Obviously, the "98 percent" is hyperbole; it is not meant to be taken as an exact measure of how much of the transmission of monetary policy is due to central bank communication. Even so, research and my own experience confirm that central bank communication is key for the transmission of monetary policy. In remarks I delivered almost two years ago, I discussed how monetary policy is transmitted to the rest of the economy through financial market prices.
4
Changes in the federal funds target range are transmitted to overnight money market rates and other short-term interest rates through arbitrage relationships. The configuration of short-term interest rates, central bank communication about the likely future path of short-term interest rates, and the associated economic outlook, in turn, affect long-term interest rates through investors' expectations.
5
Higher long-term interest rates increase the cost of borrowing for households and businesses, thereby affecting households' and businesses' spending, savings, and investment decisions.
Evolution of Fed Communications
Policymakers' approach to communication has evolved over time. In the past, policymakers were not focused on clarity and transparency in their communications as they are today. For example, former Fed Chair Alan Greenspan famously quipped in 1987, "If I seem unduly clear to you, you must have misunderstood what I said."
6
In the 1990s, however, he started to embrace transparency.
Figure 1
shows a timeline of the steps taken toward increasing transparency at the Fed since the 1990s. In 1993, the Fed started to publish Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting minutes in their current form, and, soon after, it began releasing FOMC meeting transcripts with a five-year lag. In February 1994, the FOMC started to issue post-FOMC meeting statements following meetings at which there was a change in the intended policy stance. Later, it regularly incorporated the target federal funds rate into these statements. In May 1999, the FOMC started to publish statements after every meeting, even on occasions when there was no change in policy. In 2004, the FOMC accelerated the release of the minutes to three weeks after the meeting as opposed to after the subsequent FOMC meeting. During the tenure of former Fed Chair Ben Bernanke, the Fed's transparency increased significantly. In November 2007, the FOMC began releasing the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP). In 2011, Chair Bernanke started holding press conferences after every other FOMC meeting. In 2012, under his leadership, the FOMC adopted an explicit inflation target of 2 percent in its new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. Also, it started publishing anonymized individual FOMC participants' views on the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate, now famously known as the "dot plot." In 2019, Chair Powell continued this march toward transparency and started holding press conferences after every FOMC meeting.
Of course, Chair Powell and other policymakers testify regularly before Congress, as required by law. Also, FOMC participants give public speeches and transparently discuss their views on monetary policy and associated issues, as evidenced by my speech here today.
Previously, I have spoken about two primary reasons for the increase in transparency.
7
First, transparency allows for greater accountability to the public. Second, there is a growing appreciation in the economics profession that clarity about policy actions helps the transmission of monetary policy to the rest of the economy by, for example, making asset prices more informationally efficient. Relatedly, by conveying aspects of the Fed's reaction function, communications can help inform investors' views about the likely future path of monetary policy in a way that helps achieve the Fed's monetary policy objectives.
Using Textual Analysis to Quantify Central Bank Communication
Central bank communication is clearly important in shaping the path of interest rates, so it is not surprising that investors and researchers use textual analysis techniques, including artificial intelligence, to quantify in an automated way information conveyed through FOMC statements and other communications, such as speeches by Governors and Fed Bank presidents.
8
Researchers have tested the hypothesis that clarity about policy actions would help the transmission of monetary policy to the rest of the economy. Using textual analysis, high-frequency asset price data, and high-frequency central bank communication data, this research shows that investors' reactions to specific sentences communicated by the central bank are quickly incorporated into asset prices.
9
In addition, economists have used textual analysis to understand how media reporting of central bank communication affects short-term interest rates.
10
For example, some have used a bag-of-words technique to estimate media sentiment during FOMC announcement days.
11
By design, a high media sentiment is meant to capture times when journalists report that the FOMC is more likely to tighten monetary policy in the near future.
Figure 2
shows that the correlation between media sentiment and six-month U.S. Treasury yield changes is positive and relatively high (40 percent), which suggests that media reporting of central bank communication plays an important role in the transmission of monetary policy.
Policymakers know that their communications are likely to affect the course of short-term interest rates, other asset prices, and the associated economic outlook, resulting in an easing or tightening of financial conditions. Therefore, policymakers have always paid close attention to what they say, well before market participants started applying artificial intelligence tools to central bank communications.
In general, researchers argue that automated textual analysis and automated trading have increased the speed with which information is incorporated into asset prices. That suggests that asset prices have become more informationally efficient, sometimes in a matter of seconds or even milliseconds instead of minutes after information is released.
12
Thus, increased transparency and advances in technology have potentially made asset prices more informationally efficient, which, in turn, helps with the transmission of monetary policy. Yet others argue that automated algorithms may be more prone to mistakes than humans, may provide an incentive for investors to value speed over accuracy, and may reduce the long-run informativeness of asset prices, which could hurt the transmission of monetary policy.
13
I look forward to the findings of future research as we develop a deeper understanding of this issue. For now, I do not think artificial intelligence is changing the way policymakers communicate, but research shows that it has affected how quickly information about policy is incorporated into asset prices.
Central Bank Communication: Is Anyone Listening?
Next, I will discuss whether research using textual analysis is helping policymakers to understand better who is listening to central bank communication. In 2018, former Fed Vice Chair Alan Blinder predicted that "central banks will keep trying to communicate with the general public, as they should. But for the most part, they will fail."
14
He explained further that "many economic models presume that central bank communication is aimed at wage-setters, price-setters, consumers, or investors—maybe all of them. But are they listening?" His answer was
no
, they are not listening to central bank communications, and he cited economic research using survey data to support his answer.
15
More recently, however, research shows that nonexperts and households
are
listening to central bank communications. Some of this research uses textual analysis, and some uses randomized control trials. Researchers have used textual analysis to process automatically and quantify more than 3.2 million posts on social media by experts and nonexperts. This research shows that journalists and professional forecasters who comment often on central bank policies, as well as nonexperts who do not comment regularly on central bank policies do listen to central bank communications.
16
Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy Transmission
Further, research shows that direct central bank communication and the media's reporting of central bank communication are highly correlated. Yet when they do not align, the media's reporting tends to have a larger effect on asset prices and professional forecasters' views about the future than the central bank's direct communication.
17
In addition, a randomized control trial with nearly 20,000 U.S. individuals shows that central bank communication affects households' inflation expectations, which, in turn, affects their behavior as measured by scanner-collected data.
18
This research shows that while central bank communication tends to affect household expectations and spending behavior, the way households receive information matters. In particular, households appear to react more to information conveyed by social media, friends, and family than to information conveyed by traditional media. All told, this research suggests that central bank efforts to communicate with the general public are having some success, but there is still room for improvement.
Measuring Economic Concepts Using Textual Analysis
Textual analysis is not only helping researchers understand who is listening to central bank communication. Generally, it is helping them to measure qualitative information that is hard to capture with numerical forecasts and estimate difficult-to-measure economic concepts such as uncertainty, supply chain disruptions, and financial conditions.
19
As I mentioned in a previous speech, uncertainty is not directly observable in the same way that inflation and economic output are.
20
Notwithstanding the difficulty in measuring uncertainty, researchers have developed tools to assess it. In fact, in the past two decades, there has been tremendous growth in research devoted to the subject, especially on text-based measures of uncertainty. For example, researchers created an economic policy uncertainty index, shown in
figure 3
, based on the number of leading newspaper articles that contain a combination of words related to economic policy uncertainty.
21
As shown in the figure, economic uncertainty in the U.S. reached an all-time high at the onset of the pandemic, came down slightly after the pandemic, and has recently increased as the potential economic implications of new government policies are discussed in newspaper articles. Research also shows that newspaper text-based measures are highly correlated with stock price volatility, and that higher values of these measures are associated with lower investment and employment. A corollary to that insight is that policymakers should communicate as clearly as possible to avoid increasing uncertainty.
Recent research has also discovered that narrative sentiment conveys information that may be hard to capture in numerical forecasts. For example, it was shown that the tone of text accompanying a set of economic forecasts produced by the Fed's staff, predicts forecast errors of the Fed's staff as well as Blue Chip participants.
22
The predictive power of sentiment seems to be arising from signaling the downside risks to economic performance for output, employment, and stock returns. These findings suggest that the tone of the narrative captures information that is not necessarily provided by corresponding forecasts. Not surprisingly, given this information, the tonality has predictive power for stock prices as well as monetary policy surprises.
Another example of how textual analysis is helping researchers estimate difficult-to-measure concepts is new measures of firms' demand and supply shocks. Traditionally, academic researchers use sign restrictions in price and quantity measures to identify and differentiate demand shocks from supply shocks. An increase in price and quantity is considered a demand shock; an increase in price accompanied by a decline in quantity is considered a supply shock. These so-called sign restrictions are useful tools; however, it is possible that an increase in price and quantity can be due to a surge in demand in the face of supply chain disruptions. Other popular measures of supply chain disruptions are supplier delivery times and order backlogs provided by the Institute for Supply Management (ISM). These measures, however, only estimate firm activity relative to the previous month and can lack important context for understanding short-term dynamics that can otherwise be captured in qualitative, text-based measures. Thus, it can be useful to complement sign restriction methods, supplier delivery times, and order backlogs with textual analysis techniques that quantify firms' narratives in earnings calls and the Beige Book to identify better demand and supply shocks.
23
For example,
figure 4
shows the Supply Chain Bottleneck Sentiment Index, the solid black line, estimated by a Board economist using textual analysis techniques to quantify the information conveyed in the Fed's Beige Book publications, along with the ISM Supplier Delivery Index, the dashed red line.
24
For illustration purposes, both indexes are normalized to have a zero mean and a standard deviation equal to one, with large positive numbers indicating that supply chains are stressed. Both indexes surged in the 1970s after the oil price increase and ensuing energy crisis. Supply chain disruptions reappeared in the 2000s with chip shortages, and, most recently, bottlenecks arose during the COVID-19 pandemic. The figure illustrates how the text-based measure signals a more prolonged period of supply chain disruptions during the pandemic. Comparing both measures, we see that the monthly changes in delivery times improved at a fast pace, as shown in the ISM index, but narratives of the post-pandemic recovery, as captured in the Beige Book, were signaling elevated levels of supply chain disruptions that eased more slowly.
Conclusion
The idea of using qualitative information on media, government records, central bank, or management communication in economic research to understand better the transmission of monetary policy is not new.
25
What is novel is that, in the past two decades, there have been advances in textual analysis techniques and incredible growth of data that are easily available to researchers and investors, in terms of both volume and variety. The advances in textual analysis techniques and the growth in alternative data have, in turn, helped researchers to better estimate difficult-to-measure economic concepts, to more easily identify who listens to central bank communications, and to investigate how quickly central bank communication is incorporated into asset prices, among other things. Also, we have greater access to high-frequency data, such as millisecond timestamp financial transactions, and "alternative data," which includes textual information from social media posts. As I mentioned earlier, these new textual analysis techniques are important to policymakers because we seek to understand how our communications are being heard, interpreted, understood, and acted upon.
While I am grateful that textual analysis techniques and data access have improved over the years, I will end on a cautionary note. Automatic textual analysis should not be regarded as superseding other analysis of the historical record on monetary policy. A wealth of data and techniques to analyze text does not necessarily translate into greater insight. Therefore, it is important that policymakers, researchers, and investors continue to be diligent in using the right tools and the right data to make the best possible inferences.
26
Thank you!
References
Adams, Travis, Andrea Ajello, Diego Silva, and Francisco Vazquez-Grande (2023). "
More than Words: Twitter Chatter and Financial Market Sentiment
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2023-034. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May.
Appelbaum, Binyamin (2012). "A Fed Focused on the Value of Clarity,"
New York Times,
December 13.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis (2016). "Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 131 (November), pp. 1593–636.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2015). "
Inaugurating a New Blog
,"
Ben Bernanke's Blog,
March 30.
——— (2022). "
Ben Bernanke: The Fed from the Great Inflation to COVID-19 (PDF)
," webinar, Brookings Institution, Washington, May 23.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Kenneth N. Kuttner (2005). "What Explains the Stock Market's Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?"
Journal of Finance,
vol. 60 (June), pp. 1221–57.
Blinder, Alan S. (2018). "Through a Crystal Ball Darkly: The Future of Monetary Policy Communication,"
AEA Papers and Proceedings,
vol. 108 (May), pp. 567–71.
Chaboud, Alain P., Benjamin Chiquoine, Erik Hjalmarsson, and Clara Vega (2014). "Rise of the Machines: Algorithmic Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market,"
Journal of Finance,
vol. 69 (October), pp. 2045–84.
Cieslak, Anna, and Michael McMahon (2023). "Tough Talk: The Fed and Risk Premium," working paper, April (revised June 2024).
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber (2022). "Monetary Policy Communications and Their Effects on Household Inflation Expectations,"
Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 130 (June), pp. 1537–84.
Dessaint, Olivier, Thierry Foucault, and Laurent Fresard (2024). "Does Alternative Data Improve Financial Forecasting? The Horizon Effect,"
Journal of Finance,
vol. 79 (June), pp. 2237–87.
Dugast, Jerome, and Thierry Foucault (2017). "Data Abundance and Asset Price Informativeness,"
Journal of Financial Economics,
vol. 130 (November), pp. 367–91.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi (2015). "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
vol. 7 (January), pp. 44–76.
Ehrmann, Michael, and Alena Wabitsch (2022). "Central Bank Communication with Non-experts – A Road to Nowhere?"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 127 (April), pp. 69–85.
Gardner, Ben, Chiara Scotti, and Clara Vega (2022). "Words Speak as Loudly as Actions: Central Bank Communication and the Response of Equity Prices to Macroeconomic Announcements,"
Journal of Econometrics,
vol. 231 (December), pp. 387–409.
Gómez-Cram, Roberto, and Marco Grotteria (2022). "Real-Time Price Discovery via Verbal Communication: Method and Application to Fedspeak,"
Journal of Financial Economics,
vol. 143 (March), pp. 993–1025.
Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein (2015). "Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates,"
Journal of Financial Economics,
vol. 115 (March), pp. 429–48.
Jefferson, Philip N. (2023a). "
Implementation and Transmission of Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the H. Parker Willis Lecture, Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Va., March 27.
——— (2023b). "
Communicating about Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at "Central Bank Communications: Theory and Practice," a conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio, May 13.
——— (2023c). "
Elevated Economic Uncertainty: Causes and Consequences
," speech delivered at "Global Risk, Uncertainty, and Volatility," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Swiss National Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements, Zurich, Switzerland, November 14.
Kumar, Saten, Hassan Afrouzi, Olivier Coibion, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2015). "
Inflation Targeting Does Not Anchor Inflation Expectations: Evidence from Firms in New Zealand (PDF)
," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 151–208.
O'Hara, Maureen (2015). "High Frequency Market Microstructure,"
Journal of Financial Economics,
vol. 116 (May), pp. 257–70.
Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider (2006). "
Equilibrium Yield Curves
," NBER Working Paper Series 12609. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October (revised January 2007).
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (1989). "Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz,"
NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
vol. 4, pp.121–70.
——— (2023). "Presidential Address: Does Monetary Policy Matter? The Narrative Approach after 35 Years."
American Economic Review
, vol. 113 (June), pp. 1395-423.
——— (2024). "Lessons from History for Successful Disinflation,"
Journal of Monetary Economics
, vol.148, Supplement (November), 103654.
Schmanski, Bennett, Chiara Scotti, Clara Vega, and Hedi Benamar (2023). "
Fed Communication, News, Twitter, and Echo Chambers
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2023-36. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May.
Sharpe, Steven A., Nitish R. Sinha, and Christopher A. Hollrah (2023). "The Power of Narrative Sentiment in Economic Forecasts,"
International Journal of Forecasting,
vol. 39 (July–September), pp. 1097–121.
Soto, Paul (2023). "
Measurement and Effects of Supply Chain Bottlenecks Using Natural Language Processing
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 6 (revised January 16, 2025).
Swanson, Eric T., and Vishuddhi Jayawickrema (2024). "Speeches by the Fed Chair Are More Important Than FOMC Announcements: An Improved High-Frequency Measure of U.S. Monetary Policy Shocks," working paper, University of California, Irvine.
von Beschwitz, Bastian, Donald B. Keim, and Massimo Massa (2020). "First to 'Read' the News: News Analytics and Algorithmic Trading,"
Review of Asset Pricing Studies,
vol. 10 (February), pp. 122–78.
Young, Henry L., Anderson Monken, Flora Haberkorn, and Eva Van Leemput (2021). "
Effects of Supply Chain Bottlenecks on Prices using Textual Analysis
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 3.
1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. See Swanson and Jayawickrema (2024).
Return to text
3. See Bernanke (2015, 2022).
Return to text
4. See Jefferson (2023a). Arbitrage is the economic force that keeps prices of financial instruments with similar payoffs, such as the federal funds rate and repo rates, close to each other.
Return to text
5. More specifically, according to the expectations theory of the term structure of interest rates, intermediate- and long-term interest rates are importantly affected by the weighted average of expected future short-term interest rates. In addition, monetary policy affects risk premiums (see, for example, Bernanke and Kuttner, 2005; Hanson and Stein, 2015; and Gertler and Karadi, 2015) and term premiums (if monetary policy tightens in response to inflationary shocks, term premiums also tend to rise as longer-maturity bonds become riskier; see, for example, Piazzesi and Schneider, 2006).
Return to text
6. See Appelbaum (2012).
Return to text
7. See Jefferson (2023b).
Return to text
8. See, for example, Cieslak and McMahon (2023); Gardner, Scotti, and Vega (2022); Gómez-Cram and Grotteria (2022); and Sharpe, Sinha and Hollrah (2023).
Return to text
9. See, for example, Gómez-Cram and Grotteria (2022), who use textual analysis, high-frequency asset price data, and high-frequency central bank communication data to understand investors' reactions to specific sentences communicated by the FOMC.
Return to text
10. See Schmanski and others (2023).
Return to text
11. A bag-of-words technique is a natural language processing technique that uses a collection (or "bag") of words and a scoring system to quantify qualitative textual information. Schmanski and others (2023) use this technique to pair a set of topic keywords with modifiers and determine whether the combination of topic-modifier communicates tightening, neutral, or easing news. By construction, the sentiment is high when the media thinks the FOMC is more likely to tighten monetary policy in the near future.
Return to text
12. See Chaboud and others (2014) for evidence that automated trading has increased the informational efficiency of foreign exchange markets by reducing the frequency of triangular arbitrage opportunities and the autocorrelation of high-frequency returns. See von Beschwitz and others (2020) for evidence that automated textual analysis speeds up the stock price response to news.
Return to text
13. See, for example, von Beschwitz, Keim, and Massa (2020); Dugast and Foucault (2017); and O'Hara (2015).
Return to text
14. See Blinder (2018, p. 569).
Return to text
15. See Kumar and others (2015).
Return to text
16. Ehrmann and Wabitsch (2022) document that the number of expert and nonexpert comments posted on the X platform (formerly known as Twitter) that discuss central bank communication increases after European Central Bank (ECB) press conferences and other ECB communications, such as speeches by the ECB president. The authors also document that the content of the discussion tends to be objective (factual) rather than subjective, according to the authors' dictionary base subjectivity measure.
Return to text
17. See Schmanski and others (2023).
Return to text
18. See Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Weber (2022).
Return to text
19. See, for example, Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016) for textual analysis measures of economic policy, Soto (2023) and Young and others (2021) for textual analysis measures of supply chain disruptions, and Adams and others (2023) for a textual analysis measure of financial conditions.
Return to text
20. See Jefferson (2023c).
Return to text
21. See Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016).
Return to text
22. See Sharpe, Sinha, and Hollrah (2023).
Return to text
23. See Young and others (2021) and Soto (2023).
Return to text
24. See Soto (2023).
Return to text
25. See, for example, Romer and Romer (1989, 2023, 2024) for a description of the "narrative" approach.
Return to text
26. For example, Dessaint, Foucault, and Fresard (2024) suggest that alternative data mainly help forecast short-term outcomes, and not so much long-term outcomes.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 5
==================================================
February 19, 2025
How Healthy are U.S. Households’ Balance Sheets?
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At the Martin H. Crego Lecture in Economics, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Professor Ho for that kind introduction and for the opportunity to talk to the Vassar community.
1
I am happy to be back on campus. As a teenager in Washington, D.C., I had the very good fortune that a high school counselor pushed me to apply to Vassar College. I was accepted, and I earned my bachelor's degree here. Attending Vassar opened a wider variety of opportunities to me than I would have otherwise had available. But I encountered one problem: Vassar did not offer any banking or business courses, which is what I wanted to study. So, I enrolled in an economics class, figuring it was the next best thing. I was hooked, and I have been studying economics ever since.
Slide 1
My time here as a student was transformative, and I was honored to have served on Vassar's board from 2002 to 2022. Vassar is a vibrant intellectual community.
To motivate the
topic
of today's speech, let me begin by sharing with you briefly my assessment of the current state of the U.S. economy. The performance of the U.S. economy has been quite strong overall.
2
Last year, gross domestic product grew at a solid pace of 2.5 percent. I see the labor market as being in a solid position, with job creation steady and the unemployment rate at 4 percent in January. Inflation has come down a great deal over the past two and a half years but remains somewhat elevated relative to our 2 percent target. Based on recently released data, it is estimated that the 12-month change in the personal consumption expenditures price index was 2.4 percent in January. Progress toward our 2 percent objective has been slow in the past year. I expect the path of inflation to continue to be bumpy. While a cumulative cut in the policy rate by 100 basis points last year has brought the stance of monetary policy closer to a neutral setting, monetary policy continues to be restrictive. I believe that, with a strong economy and a solid labor market, we can take our time to assess the incoming data to make any further adjustments to our policy rate.
Household consumption grew by 3.2 percent over last year. Understanding the causes of the continued robustness in consumer spending is important because it accounts for two-thirds of overall economic activity. Therefore, any accurate forecast of future economic activity would need to get the growth in consumer spending right.
Today, I will discuss one important factor behind the recent strength in consumer spending: households' balance sheets—that is, their assets, such as stocks, bank accounts, and houses, and their liabilities, such as mortgages, car loans, and other forms of borrowing. At first glance, households appear to be in a strong financial position. Overall, American households currently possess a very high level of wealth that is driven by elevated house values, relatively low overall debt levels, and a strong stock market.
Asset performance and the amount of debt, however, explain only part of the picture. The health of household finances also depends on the cost of new and existing debt and the availability of credit. Household balance sheets are an important factor behind the recent strength in consumer spending. That said, some households may have a difficult time weathering unexpected costs or economic shocks. Looking at a variety of indicators across the income distribution shows that, while, in aggregate, household balance sheets are indeed strong, low- and middle-income households, and those with lower credit scores, may be stretched.
The remainder of my talk is organized as follows. I will begin by discussing household wealth, both in aggregate and across the distribution of income. Then, I connect elevated wealth to recent spending patterns. After that, I discuss the assets side of household balance sheets. Then, I turn to liabilities, including the cost of servicing debt. Next, I discuss households' ability to get new credit and the cost of such credit. Before concluding, I discuss the role of households' balance sheets in the transmission of monetary policy.
Overall Household Wealth and Its Implications for Spending
Let me now turn to the overall picture of household wealth.
Figure 1
shows a stylized household balance sheet, with assets on the left and liabilities on the right. Net worth, also called wealth, is the difference between the two sides of the balance sheet—assets less liabilities—and it is a key indicator of households' financial health. Relative to income, households' net worth is near its highest level in the past 30 years. Total net worth in the U.S. was over $50 trillion higher in the third quarter of last year than it was at the end of 2019. After one accounts for inflation, this accumulation represents an increase in overall wealth of about 20 percent for U.S. households, as shown by the solid black line in
figure 2
.
These recent gains in household net worth have been broad based across the income distribution. The net worth of low- and middle-income households—defined as the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution and shown by the dashed red line—has increased in line with aggregate net worth.
3
Although these households account for 25 percent of total consumption, which is less than their population share, they are still key to the performance of the economy overall.
Let me now turn to the implications of household net worth for our understanding of the recent strength in spending.
Figure 3
shows the saving rate, which measures the share of disposable income—that is, income after taxes and government transfers—that households save rather than spend. The saving rate has fluctuated widely over the past few years. It rose during the pandemic, as many households received supplementary income support from the government and some cut back on spending. Then, households spent some of the savings that they had accumulated during the pandemic, leading the saving rate to fall to a relatively low level in 2022. The saving rate has recovered somewhat since then. Now, it hovers around 1 to 1.5 percentage points below its level before the pandemic, indicating that households are still spending more of their income than usual. It seems likely that elevated household wealth helps explain this higher-than-usual spending.
Overall spending has been elevated, but how has high consumption been spread across the income distribution? Recent research shows that the spending of low- and middle-income households has lagged that of higher-income households over the past few years.
4
As shown in
figure 4
, although real retail spending growth moved similarly for all households before the pandemic, it has diverged since the middle of 2021. Since then, spending for low-income households moved roughly sideways until the middle of last year, when it began to grow again. High-income households' consumption, by contrast, has grown more consistently over this period.
Assets
Having discussed net worth and its implications for spending, now I drill down into the two components of net worth—household assets and liabilities. With regard to the asset side, elevated net worth largely reflects gains in two important asset categories: stock market holdings and real estate. Each category accounts for roughly one-fourth of households' assets. The stock market valuation has increased at a very rapid pace over the past five years, leading to a $20 trillion rise in the value of households' stock portfolios. As house prices rose, the value of households' real estate has also increased by about the same amount.
Real estate is a particularly important source of wealth for low- and middle-income households, comprising 40 percent of their net worth. Therefore, the growth in real estate wealth over the past five years accounts for a very significant share—over half—of the increase in these households' overall wealth. That said, many low-income households do not own their home, and so they did not benefit from the growth in house prices. Equities comprise a smaller share of these households' wealth, and so they account for only around 10 percent of the increase in their wealth.
Wealth allows households to weather unexpected shocks, such as the loss of a job or a surprise bill; however, not all forms of wealth are quickly and easily accessible in case of such emergencies. It can be expensive for households to access the equity that they have in their homes. Also, much of households' stock holdings are in retirement accounts that are difficult to liquidate. So, to understand how resilient households' financial situations are, I also pay close attention to the most liquid components of their net worth, which include bank deposits and money market mutual funds. As the solid black line in
figure 5
shows, in aggregate, households hold about 20 percent more of these liquid assets than they did before the pandemic. As the dashed red line shows, in contrast to the aggregate, low- and middle-income households have a slightly smaller liquid asset buffer than they did before the pandemic. This smaller buffer suggests that some of these households may not be as equipped to handle economic shocks as they were five years ago. That said, low- and middle-income households still hold more of these assets than they did 10 years ago, when many of them were still recovering from the Great Recession.
On the whole, the asset side of households' balance sheets paints a very healthy picture of their financial positions. Rising house and equity prices have increased net worth for households across the income distribution, and elevated asset valuations seem to help explain strong consumption growth last year.
Liabilities
Let me now turn to household liabilities—what households owe to their lenders.
Figure 6
plots three major categories of household debt relative to disposable personal income.
5
You see home mortgages, the largest share, at the bottom in blue; consumer credit, which includes credit cards, auto loans, student loans in orange; and other consumer loans in beige.
6
Total household debt rose through the 2000s and peaked around the time of the Global Financial Crisis of 2007 to 2009. It then began a slow decline as households "deleveraged." The evolution of total debt is driven by mortgage debt, which currently accounts for about 60 percent of total household debt. Mortgage debt levels remain relatively subdued after rising somewhat during the COVID-19 pandemic, partly due to increasing home prices leading borrowers to take out larger loans.
Figure 7
zooms in on revolving credit—largely, credit card balances—which is part of the previous "consumer credit" category.
7
Balances were at about 7 percent of disposable income until the COVID-19 pandemic. Households reduced their spending—decreasing the need for credit card debt—and in part used income support programs to pay down existing credit card debt. The result was a nearly 3 percentage point drop in revolving credit relative to disposable personal income. As consumer spending rose and households began to take on more credit card debt, this ratio began to rebound in 2021 but remains about 1 percentage point below its pre-pandemic levels.
Although levels of debt may be low, how costly is it for households to remain current on that debt?
Figure 8
plots the debt service ratio, which is the amount of required debt payments relative to disposable personal income.
8
Along with the fall in debt to which I just referred, this ratio plummeted during the initial stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. It has since risen, but it remains about 1 percentage point below its pre-pandemic level. That said, interest payments on revolving debt, which excludes mortgages, have risen over the past few years. The share of disposable personal income going to pay this interest rate is now slightly higher than it was just before the pandemic.
Credit Availability and Costs
So far, I have discussed households' current debt liabilities and how households are able to manage their current debt payments. Even households with elevated levels of assets may wish to obtain new credit. Policymakers and economists often ask, how easy is it for households, in general, to increase their borrowing, and at what cost?
Lenders consider a range of factors in determining whether to supply credit and how much credit to extend. One key factor is the borrower's "credit risk score." These scores, which are calculated by private companies, use information on individuals' past payment behavior and a variety of other factors to create a number that is predictive of their ability to repay debt.
Figure 9
plots the fraction of individuals with credit risk scores in the subprime, near-prime, and prime categories since 2014. There has been a gradual increase in the fraction of borrowers with prime scores, in part reflecting the deleveraging that I referred to earlier, which is mirrored by the decline in the fraction with subprime scores. As you can see, the fraction of subprime scores took a sharp turn downward at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. At that time, many people were able to use the pandemic-era income support programs to become current on their debt and otherwise boost their scores into near-prime and prime categories. This "credit score migration" helped many individuals obtain credit.
9
Before obtaining new credit, people may first turn to lines of credit that they already have—for example, credit cards.
Figure 10
plots "utilization rates"—the ratio of credit card balances to credit limits—for subprime, near-prime, and prime consumers. Utilization rates fell for all three groups at the beginning of the pandemic but have risen since then and are now somewhat above their pre-pandemic levels for both subprime and near-prime borrowers. These groups may be reluctant to draw down their credit lines further.
It can be challenging to determine the availability of new credit. While the total amount of credit that people have and their new borrowing can be observed, these quantities are determined both by lenders' willingness to supply credit and borrowers' demand for credit. Borrowers taking out fewer new loans may be due to a reduced supply of credit, lower demand for credit, or a combination of the two. Sometimes, however, one of these factors can be identified. For example, during the COVID-19 pandemic, reductions in household spending and increases in income support programs likely reduced the demand for credit, contributing to the decline in debt levels during that period.
A more systematic method that we have used at the Federal Reserve to help disentangle credit supply from demand has involved questions in our Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, or SLOOS.
10
This quarterly survey asks officials who oversee bank lending practices for their institutions about how they have changed loan underwriting standards over the past quarter for a variety of loan categories. "Loan underwriting standards," also known more simply as lending standards, refers to the requirements that banks impose before extending a loan. For example, banks may establish minimum credit risk scores for potential borrowers to qualify for certain kinds of consumer borrowing. Banks that raise minimum credit scores are said to have "tightened" standards and those that lower them to have "eased" standards. Tightening standards likely reduces the supply of credit.
11
Because the SLOOS surveys commercial banks, its results are most informative for those loan categories for which banks do a substantial amount of lending. Hence,
figure 11
shows survey results for consumer loans (credit card and auto loans), averaged together, weighting by balance sheet size.
12
Banks make almost all credit card loans, and about one-third of auto loans. The figure plots the fraction of banks that have reported tightening less the fraction that have reported easing each quarter, weighted by the bank's loan portfolio—so that plus-100 percent would indicate that all banks tightened, and minus-100 percent would indicate that all banks eased standards. For both credit cards and auto loans, banks eased standards in the early days of the pandemic but began to tighten them in 2022. More recent responses suggest that banks continued to tighten standards over 2024, making it more difficult for borrowers to obtain new loans. Although this tightening could limit growth in spending by those households that would need more credit cards to do so, recall that higher-credit-score borrowers are not close to exhausting their credit lines. In the most recent survey, banks have eased standards, which could support spending.
Monetary Policy Transmission
Now, before I conclude, let me say a few things about how the Federal Reserve's monetary policy has been affecting the cost of borrowing for households. The primary tool that the Federal Reserve uses to influence the economy is the federal funds rate. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meets eight times a year to discuss the appropriate setting of the committee's target range for the federal funds rate. The FOMC's objective when setting this range is to achieve its congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability. Changes in the FOMC's target for the federal funds rate affect overall financial conditions through various channels, including its effect on interest rates that matter for consumers' decisions to purchase houses and cars or borrow on their credit cards. For example, when the FOMC eases monetary policy—that is, reduces its target for the federal funds rate—the resulting lower interest rates on consumer loans elicit greater spending on goods and services. Higher spending can, in turn, lead prices to rise. Lower mortgage rates make buying a house more affordable and encourage existing homeowners to refinance their mortgages. Of course, the rates charged on longer-term loans, such as mortgages, are also affected by expectations of how monetary policy and the broader economy will evolve over the duration of the loans, not just by the current level of the federal funds rate.
With respect to lending costs, the reductions in the target range for the federal funds rate last year have begun to pass through to rates on consumer borrowing. In the credit card market, interest rates are floating and are set as a fixed markup over the prime rate. By convention, the prime rate is equal to the upper end of the target range the FOMC sets for the federal funds rate, plus 3 percentage points.
13
As seen in
figure 12
, auto loan and credit card rates have fallen in recent months, with the decline in the prime rate. Rates on auto loans are also influenced by the interest rates on shorter-maturity Treasury securities and risk spreads lenders assess to account for delinquencies and defaults. Auto loan rates have declined, thus far largely because of falls in risk spreads.
In the U.S., mortgages are generally fixed rate and have a longer duration than most other forms of consumer borrowing. Consequently, rates on new and existing loans can differ substantially. As shown by the solid blue line in
figure 13
, the majority of households still have mortgages with rates below 4 percent that were set some time ago. But rates on new mortgages are elevated compared with the ranges observed since the 2007–09 financial crisis, with the current average 30-year fixed rate around 7 percent. As I noted earlier, mortgages' long duration means their rates are driven more by longer-term interest rates, which are in turn determined by many factors beyond just monetary policy. Households who recently became homeowners or moved must bear the cost of paying elevated mortgage rates. As a result, many are not moving.
14
Overall, interest rates for many forms of consumer credit—with the notable exception of mortgages—have declined in recent months, starting to show the effects of the recent fall in shorter-term interest rates. Nonetheless, available data suggest that while new credit is available for households with higher credit scores and income levels, those households with lower credit scores and income levels are finding it relatively more difficult to obtain credit.
Conclusion
Let's return to the title question: How strong are households' balance sheets? Generally, households appear to be in a good position: Asset holdings are high across the income distribution, driven by high house and equity prices, and debt levels are subdued. Interest rates on some forms of debt have begun to come down, and required debt service is low as a share of income. That said, some households appear to be stretched. Lower-credit-score households' utilization rates are elevated, and banks have tightened loan underwriting standards on some forms of credit. And even though, as a group, low- and middle-income households possess elevated levels of overall wealth, they have less of a buffer of liquid assets than they did before the pandemic. These indicators suggest that certain groups of households may have a hard time weathering unexpected costs or economic shocks.
In closing, let me reiterate that it is important to monitor closely the strength of household balance sheets, which inform forecasts of overall economic activity. Strong balance sheets help support consumption spending, which in turn can help deliver the economic growth that puts the Federal Reserve in the best position to achieve its policy goals of maximum employment and price stability.
References
Aladangady, Aditya, Jacob Krimmel, and Tess Scharlemann (2024). "
Locked In: Rate Hikes, Housing Markets, and Mobility
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2024-088. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November.
Bassett, William F., Mary Beth Chosak, John C. Driscoll, and Egon Zakrajšek (2014). "Changes in Bank Lending Standards and the Macroeconomy,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 62 (March), pp. 23–40.
Driscoll, John C., Jessica N. Flagg, Bradley Katcher, and Kamila Sommer (2024). "
The Effects of Credit Score Migration on Subprime Auto Loan and Credit Card Delinquencies
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 12.
English, William B. (2021). "The 'Marketization' of Bank Business Loans in the United States." Working Paper, Yale School of Management, October.
Goodman, Sarena, Geng Li, Alvaro Mezza, and Lucas Nathe (2021). "
Developments in the Credit Score Distribution over 2020
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 30.
Hacıoğlu Hoke, Sinem, Leo Feler, and Jack Chylak (2024). "
A Better Way of Understanding the US Consumer: Decomposing Retail Spending by Household Income
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 11.
1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. For a detailed discussion on my recent views on inflation, see Philip N. Jefferson (2025), "
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the Economics Department Special Lecture, Lafayette College, Easton, Pennsylvania, February 4; and for my recent views on the labor market, see Philip N. Jefferson (2025), "
Do Non-inflationary Economic Expansions Promote Shared Prosperity? Evidence from the U.S. Labor Market
," speech delivered at Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania, February 5.
Return to text
3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), "
DFA: Distributional Financial Accounts
," webpage. These data provide quarterly estimates of the distribution of a comprehensive measure of U.S. household wealth.
Return to text
4. For more details, see Hacıoğlu Hoke, Feler, and Chylak (2024).
Return to text
5. Data are taken from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), Statistical Release Z.1, "
Financial Accounts of the United States
".
Return to text
6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), Statistical Release Z.1, "
Financial Accounts of the United States
".
Return to text
7. Data are taken from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2025), Statistical Release G.19, "
Consumer Credit
".
Return to text
8. For the series and information on how it is computed, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2024), "
Household Debt Service Ratios
".
Return to text
9. For more discussion, see Goodman and others (2021) and Driscoll and others (2024).
Return to text
10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2025), "
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
".
Return to text
11. For an example of use of the SLOOS to help disentangle loan supply and demand, see Bassett and others (2014).
Return to text
12. The SLOOS results reported here are based on banks' responses weighted by each bank's outstanding loans in the respective loan category and might therefore differ from the results reported in the published SLOOS, which are based on banks' unweighted responses.
Return to text
13. Before the establishment in 2008 of a range for the federal fund rate, the convention was to use the target for the federal funds rate plus 3 percentage points. See English (2021) for more discussion.
Return to text
14. See Aladangady, Krimmel, and Scharlemann (2024).
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 6
==================================================
February 05, 2025
Do Non-inflationary Economic Expansions Promote Shared Prosperity? Evidence from the U.S. Labor Market
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Professor O'Connell, for that kind introduction and for the opportunity to talk to this group.
1
I am delighted to be back at Swarthmore College. This special community brings back fond memories of fantastic students, great colleagues, and pedagogical excellence.
Slide 1
Yesterday, I discussed my outlook for the current U.S. economy. I highlighted how the economy is growing and appears to be roughly in balance, with low unemployment and declining inflation. Today, I will review some of the historical evidence pertaining to periods when the Federal Reserve has achieved both components of its dual mandate, maximum employment and stable prices, on a sustained basis—that is, periods of long non-inflationary economic expansions. My title question is whether economic evidence indicates that such expansions also result in greater shared prosperity.
My
focus
will be on the labor market. A reason for this focus is that for many individuals, their employment attachment is a key determinant of their household's overall well-being. My approach will be to compare the current labor market with the labor market at the end of 2019—that is, at the end of the most recent long, non-inflationary expansion. Such a comparison provides a lens through which to view the prospects for broadly shared prosperity fostered by the current U.S. labor market.
The remainder of my talk is organized as follows. First, I describe the labor market at the end of 2019. After that, I discuss the state of the labor market in the immediate aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic. Then, I describe the current labor market situation. Next, I discuss possible reasons why strong labor markets facilitate broad-based prosperity. Before concluding, I consider whether the benefits of long expansions are persistent.
The Labor Market on the Eve of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Let's begin the exploration of my title question with a careful look at the situation during the historically strong labor market on the eve of the COVID-19 pandemic. Following the 2007-09 Global Financial Crisis, the U.S. economy expanded for 128 consecutive months, making it the longest economic expansion in U.S. history. During this period, as shown in
figure 1
, the aggregate unemployment rate fell steadily from a peak of 10 percent in October 2009 to 3.5 percent in September 2019, the lowest recorded in nearly 50 years. Job opportunities were plentiful in this strong labor market, with the ratio of vacancies to job seekers hovering around 1.2 throughout 2019, implying that businesses were seeking to fill more open positions than there were workers actively searching for employment. Moreover, while some long economic expansions have led to an unwelcome rise in prices, inflation remained low and stable. Indeed, the Federal Reserve was grappling with inflation somewhat below, rather than above, its longer-run 2 percent target.
In addition, and perhaps related to the length of the expansion, the pre-pandemic labor market was remarkable in terms of the broad-based gains seen across demographic groups, which contributed to a historic narrowing of employment disparities. For instance, as shown in
figure 2
, the unemployment rate among African Americans, the solid red line, has usually been about twice as high as that for white individuals, the solid blue line, and is more sensitive to the state of the business cycle. The unemployment rate among Hispanics, the dotted green line, falls between these two groups. In late 2019, however, both African American and Hispanic unemployment rates had fallen to the lowest levels on record up to that point, significantly narrowing the persistent unemployment gaps between these groups. Before this, the greatest improvement in the unemployment rate among African Americans was at the end of the 1991–2001 economic expansion, which itself was the second longest expansion in U.S. history. But in 2019, the unemployment rate for African Americans was about 2 percentage points lower than it was in early 2001.
The influence of the long expansion on employment gaps also was evident for other groups of workers. Like minorities, individuals with less education, and especially those who have not completed high school, also experience higher cyclical volatility in their employment.
2
In 2019, as shown in
figure 3
, the unemployment rate gaps between workers with less than a high school education, the solid red line, and those who have attained at least a bachelor's degree, the solid purple line, also were near multidecade lows. Further, the strong labor market created new opportunities for teens and younger workers, groups whose employment prospects, and even long-term career trajectories, are especially sensitive to the cyclical state of the economy.
3
Beyond narrowing gaps between workers actively searching for a job, the strong pre-pandemic labor market also helped draw many new participants into the labor force. Among prime-age workers, those aged 25 to 54, the labor force participation rate began rising again around 2015, as shown in
figure 4
, reversing a declining trend. This was true among both men, the solid black line, whose participation had been steadily declining since the 1950s, and women, the dashed red line, whose participation had previously peaked in early 2000. Labor force participation among women was rising especially briskly in the months just before the pandemic, essentially reversing its entire decline over the previous 20 years. While this partially reflects broader demographic trends such as increasing educational attainment, participation was rising for both women with and without a college degree after 2015, suggesting that the strong labor market played a part in this reversal.
Turning now from employment and participation to earnings, nominal wages were growing solidly before the pandemic. As with gains in employment, the strong labor market was especially beneficial for some groups. Most noticeably, as shown in
figure 5
, wage growth for the bottom quartile of earners, the solid red line, started to pick up about five years into the expansion, in late 2014, and by 2019 was significantly stronger than for workers in higher earnings quartiles, the solid purple line.
4
These differences in wage growth are important, as they imply convergence in levels and, therefore, declining wage inequality as the bottom of the distribution catches up to higher earners. Similarly, wages were growing faster for non-white workers relative to white workers in 2019, though differences by educational attainment were less pronounced at the time.
Looking back now, the U.S. economy in 2019 was in a good place. The labor market was tight but not overheating, bringing widespread gains to workers. Further, had it not been for the sudden and dramatic interruption of the COVID-19 pandemic, this strong labor market was expected to persist. In December 2019, the median Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participant expected the aggregate unemployment rate to remain below 4 percent through the end of 2022 while inflation was expected to move back up to the Committee's 2 percent objective.
5
Had this long, non-inflationary expansion continued as the Committee forecast, gaps in employment and earnings across groups may have continued to narrow as well.
The Labor Market Following the COVID-19 Pandemic
The expansion, however, was cut short by the COVID-19 pandemic. In April 2020, the unemployment rate, as shown in
figure 6
, briefly surged to 14.8 percent, its highest rate since the Great Depression while the share of Americans seeking jobs (not shown) plummeted. Moreover, those same groups that had benefited from the strong pre-pandemic labor market—African American and Hispanic workers, women, and individuals without a college degree—generally fared worse at the onset of the pandemic. Although some of these groups typically experience greater losses in economic downturns, factors unique to the pandemic, including greater exposure to the industries most affected by lockdowns, also contributed to disparities in job losses. For instance, unlike a typical recession, the pandemic disproportionately affected service industries, which employ a larger share of women than industries like construction and manufacturing, which are generally more cyclically sensitive.
Just as the pandemic itself led to unprecedented losses in the labor market, the subsequent recovery was unprecedented in many ways. As the health risk abated and the economy reopened, labor demand surged as businesses attempted to re-hire workers, but many workers remained on the sidelines. By late 2021, the labor force participation rate was still well below its pre-pandemic level. Vacancies rose to record levels, while, at the same time, quits, as shown in
figure 7
, surged as workers sought out new job opportunities, leading some to refer to the post-pandemic recovery as the "Great Resignation." Consequently, as shown in
figure 8
, the gap between available jobs, the solid black line, and available workers, the dashed red line, which had been just over 1 million positions in late 2019, widened to over 6 million, the equivalent of two job openings for every unemployed worker. This was an exceptionally tight labor market, far exceeding any in recent history, including the labor market before the pandemic.
The strong post-pandemic aggregate economy reversed the disparities between groups that initially widened in 2020. The aggregate unemployment rate fell to 3.4 percent in April 2023, its lowest since 1969. That same month, the unemployment rate for African Americans fell to 4.8 percent, the lowest level on record and 1/2 percentage point below the previous record set in 2019, as shown in
figure 9
by the red solid line, which is the difference between the unemployment rate for African Americans and its own average in the year 2019.
Although labor force participation was initially slower to recover, the labor force participation rate among prime-age women climbed to its highest level ever in 2023, well above even pre-pandemic levels, as shown in
figure 10
by the red dashed line, which is the difference between the labor force participation rate for women and its own average in the year 2019.
The tight labor market also led to a surge in nominal wage growth, especially for workers lower in the earnings distribution. In fact, as shown in
figure 11
, wage growth for low-wage workers, the solid red line, was strong enough, with a peak wage growth close to 7.5 percent in 2022, to drive a meaningful compression in the aggregate wage distribution (not shown). Economic research suggests that the pandemic recovery reversed around one-third of the increase in the aggregate ratio of the 90th percentile to the 10th percentile wage inequality since the 1980s.
6
These gains at the bottom of the income distribution also were reflected in the experience of different demographic groups, as shown in
figure 12
, with stronger wage growth for nonwhite workers, the dashed red line, relative to white workers, the solid black line, and, unlike even the pre-pandemic expansion, for workers with a high school education or less relative to those with a bachelor's degree or more.
Unlike the noninflationary pre-pandemic expansion, however, these nominal wage gains coincided with rising prices, reducing many workers' actual purchasing power. Real wage growth deflated by the personal consumption expenditures price index, which adjusts for the effect of inflation on workers' purchasing power, was negative for many workers in 2022, despite strong aggregate employment growth. Further, the costs of inflation also vary across groups, and there is evidence that rising prices may hurt lower-income populations more.
7
This underscores the connection between the two components of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate to promote both maximum employment and stable prices, since the benefits of strong labor markets are eroded when accompanied by an unwelcome rise in inflation.
The Current Labor Market Situation
Let me turn now to the labor market situation more recently. As the economy has recovered from the pandemic, the labor market has come into better balance. By mid-2024, the gap between available jobs and available workers—I'll show that
figure again
here—had essentially returned to where it was in 2019, reflecting both a decline in vacancies and improvements in labor supply. Various indicators pointed to a labor market that was still tight, but no longer overheating.
Currently, the labor market remains solid, on balance, and inflation continues a bumpy descent toward the FOMC's 2 percent objective. Layoff activity and initial claims for unemployment insurance, shown in
figure 13
, remain low by historical standards even as job openings have moved down to more normal levels. The unemployment rate appears to have leveled off close to what the median FOMC participant currently sees as its long-run sustainable level of 4.2 percent.
8
While employment gaps between certain demographic groups have widened a touch since 2022, they remain historically narrow. Further, a welcome development as inflation has moderated is that real wage growth has picked up even as nominal wage growth has slowed. Though wages are now growing similarly across demographic groups, the narrowing of the wage gap across demographic groups realized in 2021 and 2022 persists.
How Do Strong Labor Markets Facilitate Broad-Based Prosperity?
Looking back at long, noninflationary episodes like the pre-pandemic expansion raises the question of why strong labor markets have been especially beneficial for certain demographic groups. Although the literature has not reached a definite conclusion to this question, researchers have pointed to several economic mechanisms that may help explain these patterns.
In 1973, the economist Arthur Okun argued that "high-pressure" labor markets—such as those in 2019 and during the pandemic recovery—allowed workers to move up the job ladder, creating new opportunities for individuals on the margins of the labor market.
9
,
10
Further, he argued that when job openings are difficult to fill, employers relax hiring standards, creating new opportunities for individuals who otherwise might struggle to find employment. Consistent with this argument, economic research shows that as the labor market strengthened from 2010 to 2014, employers reduced education and experience requirements in online job postings.
11
Economic research also highlights the role of more productive job-worker matches as tight labor markets facilitate a re-allocation of labor to better and more productive jobs.
12
On the participation side, the labor force participation rate tends to respond to business cycles with a significantly longer lag than the unemployment rate, for instance, due to the stickiness of decisions related to caregiving or educational responsibilities. This suggests that long expansions are especially important for drawing non-participants back into the labor market.
13
Of course, each business cycle is different, making it difficult to draw general conclusions from past episodes. The pandemic recovery, for example, led to a rise in retirements, far more than what would have been expected given population aging.
14
On the downside, this contributed to the significant shortage of workers as the economy was reopening. On the upside, it may have created more opportunities for younger workers to move up the job ladder than is typical during a normal expansion, making Okun's argument especially relevant. The COVID-19 pandemic also was a remarkable reallocation shock, and elevated quits and job switching may have improved the quality of matches between businesses and workers more than usual, potentially contributing to strong productivity growth and wage gains.
Perhaps paradoxically, excessively tight labor markets may not be beneficial to lower-wage workers in the long run. Some economists argue that hiring difficulties may lead firms to adopt technologies that substitute, rather than complement, workers, ultimately reducing labor demand.
15
Similarly, an overheating labor market may lead some workers to prioritize short-term gains over longer-term career stability. Empirical evidence, for example, suggests that during economic expansions some young people choose to take an unstable job that is likely to disappear in the next recession, rather than invest in training opportunities.
16
Are the Benefits of Long Expansions Lasting?
Another key question for policymakers is whether the benefits of long expansions can be sustained, given that the same groups who benefit disproportionately from strong labor markets also fare worse in recessions. Again, the literature, while not conclusive, offers some reasons for cautious optimism. There is some empirical evidence that suggests that the benefits of tight labor markets are somewhat persistent, at least for African Americans and women.
17
The fact that labor market disparities that worsened during the pandemic returned to their pre-pandemic levels so quickly following the pandemic may be another reason to be hopeful.
Conclusion
Let me
conclude
by offering an answer to my title question. The weight of the historical evidence I discussed today suggests that broadly shared economic prosperity is more likely when the economy grows over time with low unemployment and stable prices. While the early part of the current expansion was inflationary, the intent of monetary policy actions over the past few years has been to return us to a prolonged period where prices are stable and the labor market remains solid. The historical experience of the U.S. labor market suggests that long, noninflationary expansions are associated with narrower gaps in employment and earnings, with minority groups and less-educated workers benefiting disproportionately from sustained periods of strong economic growth. Such benefits can help make up for the disproportionate losses experienced by the same groups during economic downturns and, in some cases, may even lead to lasting gains.
Finally, let me return to where I started, the Federal Reserve's dual mandate: maximum employment and stable prices. The historical evidence that I have reviewed tonight suggests that shared prosperity is a byproduct of sustained accomplishment of our mission.
Thank you.
Slide 18
References
Aaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). "
Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)
"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Spring, pp. 333–75.
Akerlof, George A., Andrew K. Rose, and Janet L. Yellen (1988). "
Job Switching and Job Satisfaction in the U.S. Labor Market (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
no. 2, pp. 495–582.
Autor, David, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2023). "
The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market
," NBER Working Paper Series 31010. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March (revised May 2024).
Betts, Julian R., and Laurel L. McFarland (1995). "Safe Port in a Storm: The Impact of Labor Market Conditions on Community College Enrollments,"
Journal of Human Resources,
vol. 30 (Autumn), pp. 741–65.
Cajner, Tomaz, John Coglianese, and Joshua Montes (2021). "
The Long-Lived Cyclicality of the Labor Force Participation Rate
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2021-047. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
Dellas, Harris, and Plutarchos Sakellaris (2003). "On the Cyclicality of Schooling: Theory and Evidence,"
Oxford Economic Papers,
vol. 55 (January), pp. 148–72.
Dellas, Harris, and Vally Koubi (2003). "Business Cycles and Schooling,"
European Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 19(4), pp. 843–59.
Jefferson, Philip N. (2005). "Does Monetary Policy Affect Relative Educational Unemployment Rates?"
American Economic Review,
vol. 95 (May), pp.76–82.
——— (2008). "Educational Attainment and the Cyclical Sensitivity of Employment,"
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
vol. 26 (October), pp. 526–35.
Krueger, Alan B. (2002). "Economic Scene: As Recovery Builds, the Less Educated Go to the End of the Employment Line,"
New York Times,
March 7.
Modestino, Alicia Sasser, Daniel Shoag, and Joshua Ballance (2016). "Downskilling: Changes in Employer Skill Requirements over the Business Cycle,"
Labour Economics,
vol. 41 (August), pp. 333–47.
Montes, Joshua, Christopher Smith, and Juliana Dajon (2022). "
'The Great Retirement Boom
': The Pandemic-Era Surge in Retirements and Implications for Future Labor Force Participation," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-081. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November.
Okun, Arthur M. (1973). "
Upward Mobility in a High-Pressure Economy (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
no. 1, pp. 207–52.
Orchard, Jacob (2021), "Cyclical Demand Shifts and Cost of Living Inequality," working paper, February (revised September 2022).
Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz (2012). "The Short- and Long-Term Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession,"
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
vol. 4 (January), pp. 1–29.
1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. See Jefferson (2005, 2008).
Return to text
3. See Oreopoulos, Von Wachter, and Heisz (2012).
Return to text
4. Nominal wages in the figure are measured by the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker. Series show 12-month moving averages of the median percent change in the nominal hourly wage of individuals observed 12 months apart. Workers are assigned to wage quartiles based on the average of their wage reports in both the Current Population Survey and outgoing rotation group interviews; workers in the lowest 25 percent of the average wage distribution are assigned to the 1st quartile, and those in the top 25 percent are assigned to the 4th quartile.
Return to text
5. The December 2019 median forecast of FOMC participants is taken from the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
. FOMC participants submit projections of future economic activity and their individual views of the appropriate path of monetary policy conditional thereupon four times a year. These projections are published as the SEP. The SEP is neither a consensus forecast nor is it a commitment to a policy path. Rather, it shows the median, central tendency, and range of the participants' projections estimated using the 19 individual projections.
Return to text
6. See Autor, Dube, and McGrew et al. (2023).
Return to text
7. See Orchard (2022).
Return to text
8. See the December 2024 median forecast of FOMC participants in the SEP, which is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
9. See Okun (1973).
Return to text
10. While there is no official definition of a "high-pressure" labor market, the term usually refers to a period when the unemployment rate is below its natural rate—that is, below its long-run sustainable level.
Return to text
11. See Modestino and others (2016).
Return to text
12. See Akerlof, Rose, and Yellen (1988).
Return to text
13. See Cajner, Coglianese, and Montes (2021).
Return to text
14. See Montes, Smith, and Dajon (2022).
Return to text
15. See Krueger (2002).
Return to text
16. Specifically, empirical evidence indicates that educational enrollment rates go down during expansions. For four-year college enrollment rates, see Dellas and Sakellaris (2003); for community college enrollment rates, see Betts and McFarland (1995); for high school enrollment rates, see Dellas and Koubi (2003).
Return to text
17. See Aaronson and others (2019).
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 7
==================================================
February 04, 2025
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At the Economics Department Special Lecture, Lafayette College, Easton, Pennsylvania
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Professor Smith. It is an honor to be speaking to you today here at Lafayette College.
1
I am glad to have the opportunity to return to such a historically important place as Easton, Pennsylvania, and the Lehigh Valley. This area was part of this country's colonial beginnings, it was instrumental in the rising of the industrial age, and, as the home to Crayola, it very literally played a role in coloring how we see the world. Today, this region is leading the way forward with its many outstanding institutions of higher education, very prominently including, of course, Lafayette College.
Slide 1
Today, I would like to take this opportunity to share with you my outlook for the U.S. economy and my views of appropriate monetary policy. This is a useful time to do that, as my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the Federal Reserve's primary monetary policymaking body, held our first meeting of 2025 just last week.
Overall, the U.S. economy is starting the year in a good position. I expect inflation's slow descent to continue, and I anticipate that economic growth and labor market conditions will remain solid. I have learned, however, that it is wise to be humble about my projections. There is always a great deal of uncertainty around any economic forecast, and currently we face additional uncertainties about the exact shape of government policies, as well as their economic implications.
Last week, my FOMC colleagues and I discussed the latest economic developments and reviewed data that arrived since our previous policy meeting in December. At the conclusion of that meeting, I voted in support of the Committee's decision to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 percent. This decision was made in support of our goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. I remain focused on setting policy to achieve the dual-mandate goals given to us by Congress: maximum employment and stable prices. Sound monetary policy and positive supply-side developments have contributed to the achievement of sustained economic growth in recent years, the return of low unemployment, and inflation moving sustainably toward our 2 percent objective. I remain committed to returning inflation to our target while sustaining the solid labor market. Now is an appropriate time to assess the path forward for the economy. I am happy to be here today to share my views with you.
Economic Activity
The U.S. economy appears to be maintaining its momentum after growing at a solid pace last year. Last year's growth was notable because many private forecasters in 2023 projected a significant downturn sometime in 2024.
2
However, data over the past year painted a very different picture. GDP grew 2.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2024, according to last week's data release.
3
As you can see in
figure 1
, that extends a stretch of solid quarterly growth over the past couple of years. Shortly, when I discuss the labor market, I will say more related to the large swing in GDP growth in 2020 that stands out in this chart. For all of 2024, the economy grew 2.5 percent, which is a modest slowing from the 3.2 percent growth in 2023. The economy has been benefiting from positive supply developments, including more workers joining the labor force and higher labor productivity.
The resilience of American consumers is the driving force behind the solid economic growth seen in recent quarters. Household spending, adjusted for inflation, grew 3.2 percent in 2024, slightly stronger than in 2023. The consumer spending data we have received recently have surprised me to the upside. As you can see in
figure 2
, personal consumption increased at a faster pace each quarter last year. Nominal retail sales rose briskly in the second half of last year. Private-sector data are consistent with GDP figures. According to private surveys of businesses, activity in the services sector, which accounts for about two-thirds of all consumer spending, has been on a general upward trajectory since mid-2020.
4
Elsewhere in the economy, growth has been less robust. Residential investment has been fairly flat over the past three quarters, and growth of business fixed investment cooled last year from its strong 2023 pace. Much of the equipment investment that did take place came from imports. Indeed, domestic manufacturing industrial production was flat last year. Overall, I see the economy as continuing to grow at a healthy pace this year, though I anticipate growth to be slightly lower than what we observed in 2024. Households and firms face an uncertain environment, and that tends to lower consumer spending and business investment. If consumer spending continues to grow at the same pace as it has in the past two years, however, that could cause me to revise up my outlook for overall economic growth.
Labor Market
Turning to employment, I see the labor market as being in a solid position, with conditions broadly returning to balance after a period of being overheated. It's helpful to step back and look at the labor market's path over the past five years. Looking at
figure 3
, you can see that the unemployment rate surged in early 2020, peaking at 14.8 percent in April 2020, when the COVID-19 pandemic first took hold and a wide swath of the global economy was shutdown. The unemployment rate subsequently fell swiftly as the economy recovered. By April 2023, it touched 3.4 percent, a half-century low. At that point, many employers reported that they were struggling to fill openings. Then, over the latter part of 2023 and early 2024, the unemployment rate rose nearly a percentage point, an unusual pattern outside of a recession. As a policymaker, I took note of this rise when considering our dual-mandate objectives. Now, I have also taken note that the unemployment rate has effectively held steady since the middle of last year. I view that as a sign that downside risks in the labor market have abated.
The latest jobs report showed that the unemployment rate was 4.1 percent in December, the same reading as in June 2024.
5
That is low by historical standards and close to estimates of the longer-run rate that is consistent with our employment mandate. In the three months ending in December, payrolls rose by an average of 170,000 jobs a month. While employment growth has eased somewhat from the early part of last year, the steady unemployment rate suggests that payroll gains have been sufficient to absorb new entrants to the labor market. The general moderation in hiring is consistent with other measures showing that the demand for labor has come into better balance with the supply of workers.
Looking at
figure 4
, you can see that as of November, there were 1.2 job openings for every unemployed person seeking work. That ratio is down from 2.0 in 2022, when the labor market was overheated. Also notice that the current vacancy-to-unemployment ratio is just a little below its value before the pandemic took hold. And while hiring has eased from the pace in 2023, layoffs have not increased. As you can see in
figure 5
, the number of Americans seeking first-time unemployment benefits has trended at historically low levels for the past three years. Consistent with a moderation in hiring and a steady unemployment rate, workers' wage gains have slowed from when the labor market was overheated. Still, the pace of increase in average hourly earnings has been healthy, increasing 3.9 percent during the 12 months ending in December, and shows that, on average, worker pay has grown at a faster rate than the rate of inflation.
Looking broadly across the past several months, I see a labor market that is in solid condition and not a source of significant inflationary pressure. While the downside risks of a rapidly weakening labor market appear to have lessened, I expect some further softening that could cause the unemployment rate to edge just slightly higher this year but stay in a range consistent with recent readings.
Inflation
Thinking about the other component of our dual mandate, inflation has come down a great deal over the past two and a half years but remains somewhat elevated relative to our 2 percent objective. Inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, peaked at 7.2 percent in June 2022. Looking at the blue line in
figure 6
, you can see that it has since come down to 2.6 percent as of this past December. Economists also pay close attention to core inflation, which excludes often volatile food and energy costs. That core PCE inflation figure, shown by the red dashed line, peaked at 5.6 percent in 2022. By December 2024, it had eased to 2.8 percent. Annualized inflation over the past three months has been closer to our 2 percent objective. As you can see, the path of disinflation has been bumpy. I expect that to continue to be the case.
I find it helpful to look at the components of inflation to better understand underlying trends. Looking at
figure 7
, core goods inflation, the blue line, is running close to pre-pandemic levels, reflecting a better alignment between supply and demand after pandemic-related distortions. Nonhousing services inflation, the red dashed line, has cooled largely in line with slower wage growth. Housing services inflation, the purple dotted line, remains somewhat elevated, but I expect more progress in that category as the earlier slowing in growth of rents for new tenants feeds through into growth of average rents.
6
With supply and demand conditions having moved into better balance, wage growth slowing to a more sustainable pace, and longer-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored, I see a path for inflation to continue its progress toward our longer-run goal. While the easing of overall inflation in recent years has been encouraging, the fact is that it remains above our 2 percent objective. Monthly inflation readings tend to be volatile, consistent with the bumpy path I described, but the 12-month readings have held in a fairly consistent range somewhat above our target over the second half of last year.
Monetary Policy
In the current environment, I attach a high degree of uncertainty to my projections. As I have already mentioned, there have been notable recent instances where forecasters have been surprised. That said, I see the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals as being roughly in balance, and I am attentive to the risks to both sides of our mandate. That better balanced position is partly a result of the monetary policy actions over the past few years, which I will review briefly.
As you can see in
figure 8
, the FOMC responded to elevated inflation by raising the policy rate 5-1/4 percentage points over about 15 months, starting in March 2022, and then holding the rate at that restrictive level for more than a year. This contributed to inflation easing from a 40-year high to near current levels while maintaining a solid labor market. That outcome was historically unusual but greatly welcomed. By September of last year, I had growing confidence that with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, strength in the labor market could be maintained in a context of moderate economic growth and inflation moving sustainably down to 2 percent. The FOMC reduced the federal funds rate by a full percentage point over the course of our final three meetings last year. As a result of those actions, our policy stance is now significantly less restrictive than it was when we began lowering the federal funds rate. Given current economic conditions—specifically, inflation that remains modestly above our target and a labor market that is solid—and my projections of future economic conditions, I voted last week to maintain our current policy stance. As long as the economy and labor market remain strong, I see it as appropriate for the Committee to be cautious in making further adjustments.
Over the medium term, I continue to see a gradual reduction in the level of monetary policy restraint placed on the economy as we move toward a more neutral stance as the most likely outcome. That said, I do not think we need to be in a hurry to change our stance. In considering additional adjustments to the federal funds rate, I will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. As is always the case, monetary policy is not on a preset course. To that end, I could envision a range of scenarios for future policy. For example, if the economy remains strong and inflation does not continue to move sustainably toward 2 percent, we can maintain policy restraint for longer.
Alternatively, if the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, it may be appropriate to reduce the policy rate more quickly. Our current stance of policy is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate.
As I conclude, I want to assure you that I am mindful that monetary policy decisions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. I highly value opportunities to visit places like Lafayette College and Easton to share my views, hear from you, and see how the economy is experienced firsthand in your community. I remain fully committed to supporting maximum employment and bringing inflation sustainably to our 2 percent goal. Our success in delivering on these goals matters to all Americans.
Thank you.
Slide 10
1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. See Harriet Torry and Anthony DeBarros (2023), "A Recession Is No Longer the Consensus,"
Wall Street Journal,
October 15.
Return to text
3. See Bureau of Economic Analysis (2025), "
Gross Domestic Product, 4th Quarter and Year 2024 (Advance Estimate) (PDF)
," news release, January 30.
Return to text
4. See the December 2024 Services ISM
Report on Business,
which is available on the Institute for Supply Management's website at
https://www.ismworld.org/supply-management-news-and-reports/reports/ism-report-on-business/services/december
.
Return to text
5. See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2025), "
The Employment Situation—December 2024 (PDF)
," news release, January 10.
Return to text
6. See Philip N. Jefferson (2024), "
U.S. Economic Outlook and Housing Price Dynamics
," speech delivered at the Mortgage Bankers Association's Secondary and Capital Markets Conference and Expo 2024, New York, May 20.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 8
==================================================
November 14, 2024
Economic Outlook
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At Conversation with Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell, Dallas, Texas
Share
Watch Live
Good afternoon. Thank you to the World Affairs Council, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, and the Dallas Regional Chamber for the kind invitation to be with you today. I will start with some brief comments on the economy and monetary policy.
Looking back, the U.S. economy has weathered a global pandemic and its aftermath and is now back to a good place. The economy has made significant progress toward our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. The labor market remains in solid condition. Inflation has eased substantially from its peak, and we believe it is on a sustainable path to our 2 percent goal. We are committed to maintaining our economy's strength by returning inflation to our goal while supporting maximum employment.
Recent Economic Data
Economic growth
The recent performance of our economy has been remarkably good, by far the best of any major economy in the world. Economic output grew by more than 3 percent last year and is expanding at a stout 2.5 percent rate so far this year. Growth in consumer spending has remained strong, supported by increases in disposable income and solid household balance sheets. Business investment in equipment and intangibles has accelerated over the past year. In contrast, activity in the housing sector has been weak.
Improving supply conditions have supported this strong performance of the economy. The labor force has expanded rapidly, and productivity has grown faster over the past five years than its pace in the two decades before the pandemic, increasing the productive capacity of the economy and allowing rapid economic growth without overheating.
The labor market
The labor market remains in solid condition, having cooled off from the significantly overheated conditions of a couple of years ago, and is now by many metrics back to more normal levels that are consistent with our employment mandate. The number of job openings is now just slightly above the number of unemployed Americans seeking work. The rate at which workers quit their jobs is below the pre-pandemic pace, after touching historic highs two years ago. Wages are still increasing, but at a more sustainable pace. Hiring has slowed from earlier in the year. The most recent jobs report for October reflected significant effects from hurricanes and labor strikes, making it difficult to get a clear signal. Finally, at 4.1 percent, the unemployment rate is notably higher than a year ago but has flattened out in recent months and remains historically low.
Inflation
The labor market has cooled to the point where it is no longer a source of significant inflationary pressures. This cooling and the substantial improvement in broader supply conditions have brought inflation down significantly over the past two years from its mid-2022 peak above 7 percent. Progress on inflation has been broad based. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data released this week indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in October and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.8 percent. Core measures of goods and services inflation, excluding housing, fell rapidly over the past two years and have returned to rates closer to those consistent with our goals. We expect that these rates will continue to fluctuate in their recent ranges. We are watching carefully to be sure that they do, however, just as we are closely tracking the gradual decline in housing services inflation, which has yet to fully normalize. Inflation is running much closer to our 2 percent longer-run goal, but it is not there yet. We are committed to finishing the job. With labor market conditions in rough balance and inflation expectations well anchored, I expect inflation to continue to come down toward our 2 percent objective, albeit on a sometimes-bumpy path.
Monetary Policy
Given progress toward our inflation goal and the cooling of labor market conditions, last week my Federal Open Market Committee colleagues and I took another step in reducing the degree of policy restraint by lowering our policy interest rate 1/4 percentage point.
We are confident that with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, strength in the economy and the labor market can be maintained, with inflation moving sustainably down to 2 percent. We see the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals as being roughly in balance, and we are attentive to the risks to both sides. We know that reducing policy restraint too quickly could hinder progress on inflation. At the same time, reducing policy restraint too slowly could unduly weaken economic activity and employment.
We are moving policy over time to a more neutral setting. But the path for getting there is not preset. In considering additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, we will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The economy is not sending any signals that we need to be in a hurry to lower rates. The strength we are currently seeing in the economy gives us the ability to approach our decisions carefully. Ultimately, the path of the policy rate will depend on how the incoming data and the economic outlook evolve.
We remain resolute in our commitment to the dual mandate given to us by Congress: maximum employment and price stability. Our aim has been to return inflation to our objective without the kind of painful rise in unemployment that has often accompanied past efforts to bring down high inflation. That would be a highly desirable result for the communities, families, and businesses we serve. While the task is not complete, we have made a good deal of progress toward that outcome.
Thank you, and I look forward to our discussion.


Discurso 9
==================================================
October 09, 2024
The Fed's Discount Window: 1990 to the Present
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At the Charlotte Economics Club, Charlotte, North Carolina
Share
Thank you, Steve, for that kind introduction and for the opportunity to talk to this group today.
1
Let me start by saying that I am saddened by the tragic loss of life, destruction, and damage resulting from Hurricane Helene in North Carolina, and throughout this region. My thoughts are with the people and communities affected. For our part, the Federal Reserve and other federal and state financial regulatory agencies are working with banks and credit unions in the affected area to help make sure they can continue to meet the financial services needs of their communities.
Yesterday I shared my historical perspective on the discount window at Davidson College.
2
In 1913, when the Federal Reserve was established, the discount window was the main tool it used to provide the nation with a safer, more flexible, and more stable monetary and financial system. More than 110 years later, the discount window continues to play an important role in supporting the liquidity and stability of the banking system, and the effective implementation of monetary policy.
Today I would like to discuss with you how the discount window has evolved in the 21st century, including recent steps the Federal Reserve Board has taken to solicit feedback from the public on discount window operations. Before I address our most recent efforts, however, I will review some important episodes in discount window history that brought us to where we are today.
First, I will recount briefly events in the 1980s and early 1990s that provide important context for the reappraisal of the discount window in the early 2000s. Second, I will summarize revisions to the discount window that the Fed made in 2003 and some additional changes made since then. Third, I will describe efforts that the Fed has taken to ensure that the discount window remains effective today, including the request for information that the Board recently issued on operational aspects of the discount window and intraday credit. After completing my discussion of the discount window, I will conclude with my outlook for the U.S. economy.
Events before the 2003 Discount Window Revisions
I would like to pick up today where I left off yesterday in my speech at Davidson College: the 1980s and early 1990s. This was a period of widespread problems in the commercial banking sector. Troubled institutions borrowed from the discount window for extended periods of time as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) sought to find merger partners or otherwise manage the closure of these institutions. As a result, the discount window became associated strongly with lending to troubled institutions. Healthy banks' reluctance to borrow from the discount window increased. The greater reluctance to borrow from the discount window made it less effective both as a monetary policy tool and as a crisis-fighting tool.
3
This led to a reassessment of the discount window in the early 2000s and to eventual revisions implemented in 2003.
A Reassessment of the Discount Window in the Early 2000s
The key challenge in the reassessment of the discount window was to establish a lending program that would not only operate effectively and support monetary policy implementation, but also mitigate moral hazard and provide sufficient controls to minimize risk to Reserve Banks and, ultimately, to American taxpayers. After the reassessment, the Fed implemented several changes aimed to achieve the right balance.
The Board replaced the adjustment credit program, which was extended at a below-market rate, with a new type of discount window credit called primary credit. This new type of discount window credit became effective in 2003.
4
It is available as a backup source of liquidity to depository institutions in generally sound financial condition at an above-market rate. Making the discount rate a penalty rate is more consistent with the long-standing practice of other major central banks. This feature was intended to reduce the need for administrative pressures based on Reserve Bank staff judgment of inappropriate usage when the discount rate was below market rates. Although those measures effectively limited usage that was deemed inappropriate at the time, they also presented communication challenges regarding when it was appropriate to use the discount window and perpetuated the perception that the Fed discouraged its use.
Primary credit is a "no questions asked" facility in which eligible depository institutions are no longer required to have exhausted other sources of funding or be subject to restrictions on the use of the borrowed funds. The Fed initially set the primary credit rate 100 basis points above the target federal funds rate.
5
Since March 2020, the Fed has set the primary credit rate at a level equal to the top of the target range for the federal funds rate.
6
At the same time primary credit was established, another new program, called secondary credit, replaced the extended credit program. Secondary credit is available to depository institutions that are not eligible for primary credit. It was initially available at an interest rate 50 basis points higher than the primary credit rate, which is the spread in effect today. In contrast to primary credit, extensions under secondary credit are subject to higher collateral discounts and may involve ongoing oversight on the use of funds obtained under the program, reflecting the less-sound condition of secondary credit borrowers. Typically, Reserve Banks review a depository institution's plan to repay the loan and return to market sources of funding.
This two-tiered structure of providing the no-questions-asked primary credit program for healthy depository institutions and the secondary credit program for less-than-healthy depository institutions was designed primarily to instill public confidence in the health of institutions borrowing from the primary credit program and to reduce the reluctance of healthy depository institutions to borrow.
7
In addition, having two separate facilities would reinforce the notion that healthy and troubled depository institutions alike should regard borrowing from the Fed as an option in the event of a need for additional funds.
In the early years of the switch to the new facilities, there were signs that healthy depository institutions became more willing to borrow from the discount window. For example, some research found that after the 2003 discount window revisions, banks borrowed more from the discount window when the federal funds rate spiked than they had previously.
8
This finding suggests that the redesign of the discount window was effective in reducing banks' reluctance to borrow. As a result, the discount window may have been more effective in placing a ceiling on short-term funding rates, aiding the implementation of monetary policy, and serving as a liquidity tool when needed.
Nevertheless, it is important to acknowledge that it is difficult to measure reluctance to borrow from the discount window. When the interest rate on primary credit is above the target federal funds rate and the federal funds rate is close to its target, the aggregate volume of primary credit is expected to be low. In other words, a low average level of discount window borrowing does not necessarily mean that there is a reluctance to borrow; instead, it could simply reflect a situation in which depository institutions do not currently need to borrow. In addition, when there is an abundance of liquidity in the banking system, as is the case in the current ample-reserves monetary policy regime, depository institutions may have less need to obtain additional liquidity via the discount window. Again, this does not necessarily mean that there is a reluctance to borrow. Conversely, the presence of discount window borrowing does not necessarily reflect the absence of a reluctance to borrow. It could be the case that, although aggregate usage increases, there are still some depository institutions that are willing to pay well above the primary credit rate even when they could have borrowed readily from the discount window. For these reasons, it is important that we complement data with market outreach information to assess the effectiveness of the discount window.
Changes and Challenges since the Introduction of Primary and Secondary Credit
Primary and secondary credit exist today, but some changes have been made to primary credit since its inception. For example, although the discount window was used extensively and played an important role in the emergency measures taken during the financial crisis of 2007–09, some depository institutions during this period still were willing to borrow funds from the market at rates above the discount rate.
9
This suggested that there was a reluctance to borrow before the crisis, and that reluctance appeared to grow over the course of the crisis. To promote the restoration of orderly conditions in financial markets and provide depository institutions with greater assurance about the cost and availability of funding, the Board approved temporary changes to its primary credit discount window facility during the crisis.
10
In addition, in late 2007, the Board established the Term Auction Facility (TAF).
11
Concerns about lending to troubled depository institutions reemerged after the 2007–09 financial crisis. In the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, which was enacted in 2010, Congress required the Fed to publish detailed individual institution borrowing data with a two-year lag.
12
This action was intended to enhance the transparency and accountability of Federal Reserve lending while still preserving a measure of confidentiality to avoid discouraging depository institutions from borrowing.
More recently, in March 2020, the Fed announced changes to the provision of primary credit that were intended to encourage depository institutions to use the discount window to meet demands for credit from households and businesses in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. These changes included setting the primary credit rate at a level equal to the top of the federal funds target range—a step that enhanced the ability of the discount window to support trading within the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) target range for the federal funds rate—and communicating the terms of borrowing as 90 days, prepayable and renewable on a daily basis. To further encourage depository institutions to use the discount window, the Fed also made changes to its reporting of Reserve Bank–level aggregate weekly discount window borrowing. It consolidated amounts previously reported as "loans," which include discount window borrowing, into a broader category of assets.
13
The changes made in 2020 remain in effect.
During and after the spring 2023 stress events, the discount window again played an important role in supporting both monetary policy and financial stability. Depository institutions that came under severe stress turned to the discount window. The discount window also served an important role in providing ready access to funding, especially for depository institutions experiencing spillovers from the bank failures. To further ensure that depository institutions had the ability to meet the needs of all their depositors, the Board announced the creation of a new emergency program, the Bank Term Funding Program (BTFP). Although the BTFP was established pursuant to the Board's emergency lending authority in section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, the BTFP used the discount window infrastructure to lend to eligible depository institution borrowers.
14
By relying on the existing discount window infrastructure, the BTFP was able to begin operating right away. The program ceased extending new loans on March 11, 2024, as scheduled.
Today the discount window continues to be an effective tool, but it is important to acknowledge that economic and banking conditions continue to evolve. Since the 2003 discount window reassessment, we have seen an increased focus on liquidity in banking regulation, including the advent of quantitative liquidity requirements for large banking organizations; technological changes in the banking system; a general trend toward faster and 24-7-365 payment systems; changes in the composition and posture of Federal Home Loan Bank lending; and the move to an ample-reserves monetary policy implementation regime.
In light of these developments, the Federal Reserve System has taken important steps to ensure that the discount window performs its functions successfully in the 21st-century economy. For example, last year the Board, along with the other federal banking agencies and the National Credit Union Administration, issued guidance on contingency funding plans that encouraged depository institutions to be ready to borrow from the discount window.
15
This includes taking steps to establish borrowing relationships with the Federal Reserve, such as providing certain legal documentation and ensuring that collateral to secure loans is ready to pledge. In connection with interagency initiatives, Reserve Banks have conducted outreach to depository institutions and made efforts to guide them in using the discount window.
Data suggest that this encouragement is working. By the end of 2023, 3,900 banks, or roughly 80 percent of all banks, had completed the legal documentation required to borrow from the discount window.
16
Of those, nearly 2,000 banks had pledged collateral, with an aggregate lendable value of over $2.6 trillion after applying appropriate discounts. These figures are notably above their levels at the end of 2021 and 2022. Although I am pleased to see the improvements in discount window readiness statistics, continued outreach is still important. To that effect, this summer, Federal Reserve Banks hosted an Ask the Fed® session to discuss the purpose of the discount window, its facilities, and recommendations for depository institutions on how to prepare to borrow from the Fed.
17
Additionally, the Federal Reserve System has made important investments to enhance the technology that supports discount window activities. Earlier this year, the System launched Discount Window Direct, which is an online portal for depository institutions to request and prepay loans as well as securely message their local Reserve Bank.
18
Discount Window Direct generally is accessible 24 hours a day. We are actively encouraging the use of Discount Window Direct.
Seeking Feedback on the Discount Window
To complement our efforts to enhance discount window operations, the Federal Reserve Board recently announced that it is collecting feedback from the public on operational frictions associated with the discount window and intraday credit through the issuance of a request for information. As some of you may know, a request for information is a formal document through which a government agency solicits feedback. Members of the public can submit comments in response to the request for information until December 9, 2024.
19
The Board requests input on various discount window and intraday credit operational practices, such as the process for requesting, receiving, and repaying discount window loans as well as Reserve Bank discount window and intraday credit communications practices. Through the request for information, the Board hopes to gain further insight into the operational aspects that are the most costly or burdensome for depository institutions. This will help the Fed consider further improvements to promote efficiency and reduce burden on depository institutions. Ultimately, the Fed's goal is to build on the current discount window operations and processes so that the discount window will continue to provide ready access to funding against a wide range of collateral in the future. I encourage members of the public to submit comments on the request for information, and I look forward to considering the feedback that we receive.
Economic Outlook
Before concluding, let me share with you a summary of my outlook for the U.S. economy, as I did yesterday with the audience at Davidson. Economic activity continues to grow at a solid pace. Inflation has eased substantially. The labor market has cooled from its formerly overheated state.
Personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices rose 2.2 percent over the 12 months ending in August, well down from 6.5 percent two years earlier. Excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.7 percent, compared with 5.2 percent two years earlier. Our restrictive monetary policy stance played a role in restraining demand and in keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of inflation surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. Inflation is now much closer to the FOMC's 2 percent objective. I expect that we will continue to make progress toward that goal.
While, overall, the economy continues to grow at a solid pace, the labor market has modestly cooled. Employers added an average of 186,000 jobs per month during July through September, a slower pace than seen early this year. The unemployment rate now stands at 4.1 percent, up from 3.8 percent in September 2023. Meanwhile, job openings declined by about 4 million since their peak in March 2022. The good news is that the rise in unemployment has been limited and gradual, and the level of unemployment remains historically low. Even so, the cooling in the labor market is noticeable.
Congress mandated the Fed to pursue maximum employment and price stability. The balance of risks to our two mandates has changed—as risks to inflation have diminished and risks to employment have risen, these risks have been brought roughly into balance. The FOMC has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal. To maintain the strength of the labor market, my FOMC colleagues and I recalibrated our policy stance last month, lowering our policy interest rate by 1/2 percentage point.
Looking ahead, I will carefully watch incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks when considering additional adjustments to the federal funds target range, our primary tool for adjusting the stance of monetary policy. My approach to monetary policymaking is to make decisions meeting by meeting. As the economy evolves, I will continue to update my thinking about policy to best promote maximum employment and price stability.
Thank you.
References
Artuç, Erhan, and Selva Demiralp (2010). "Provision of Liquidity through the Primary Credit Facility during the Financial Crisis: A Structural Analysis," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
Economic Policy Review,
vol. 16 (August), p. 43–53.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2009a). "
The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet
," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 2009 Credit Markets Symposium, Charlotte, N.C., April 3.
——— (2009b). "
The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet: An Update
," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Board Conference on Key Developments in Monetary Policy, Washington, October 8.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2002a). "
Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks; Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions
," final rule, technical amendment (Docket Nos. R-1123 and R-1134),
Federal Register,
vol. 67 (November 7), pp. 67777–87.
——— (2002b). "
Publication of Final Rule Amending Regulation A (Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks)
," press release, October 31.
——— (2020). "
Federal Reserve Actions to Support the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses
," press release, March 15.
——— (2023). "
Federal Reserve Board Announces It Will Make Available Additional Funding to Eligible Depository Institutions to Help Assure Banks Have the Ability to Meet the Needs of All Their Depositors
," press release, March 12.
——— (2024a). "
Bank Term Funding Program: Frequently Asked Questions (PDF)
," updated January 24.
——— (2024b). "
Request for Information and Comment on Operational Aspects of Federal Reserve Bank Extensions of Discount Window and Intraday Credit
," request for information and comment (Docket No. OP-1838),
Federal Register,
vol. 89 (September 10), pp. 73415–18.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2023). "
Agencies Update Guidance on Liquidity Risks and Contingency Planning
," joint press release, July 28.
Clouse, James A. (1994). "
Recent Developments in Discount Window Policy (PDF)
,"
Federal Reserve Bulletin,
vol. 80 (November), pp. 965–77.
Jefferson, Philip N. (2024). "
A History of the Fed's Discount Window: 1913-2000
," speech delivered at Davidson College, Davidson, N.C., October 8.
Madigan, Brian F. (2009). "
Bagehot's Dictum in Practice: Formulating and Implementing Policies to Combat the Financial Crisis
," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Annual Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 21.
1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. See Jefferson (2024).
Return to text
3. For more details about this period, see Clouse (1994). In response to the wave of depository institution failures, Congress placed legal limitations on Federal Reserve lending to troubled institutions. Specifically, section 142 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA) amended section 10B of the Federal Reserve Act to place restraints on discount window lending to undercapitalized and critically undercapitalized insured depository institutions. FDICIA also imposed liability on the Board of Governors for excess losses incurred by the FDIC that are attributable to lending beyond those limits. The provisions of FDICIA were intended to reduce moral hazard in the banking system and limit taxpayer losses.
Return to text
4. For more details, see the October 31, 2002, Federal Reserve press release (Board of Governors, 2002b) and the final rule implementing the changes (Board of Governors, 2002a).
Return to text
5. In 2003, when primary credit was implemented, there was a single federal funds target rate. The Federal Open Market Committee adopted a federal funds target range on December 16, 2008.
Return to text
6. For details on the change to the rate spread announced in March 2020, see the press release (Board of Governors, 2020). As will be discussed in greater detail later, before 2020, the spread between the primary credit rate and the target federal funds rate (or top of the target range) had changed a few times to address economic conditions during the 2007–09 financial crisis and the subsequent recovery.
Return to text
7. This design feature also would help Reserve Banks manage risk more easily by establishing a standardized approach and risk controls when lending through a facility reserved for troubled depository institutions. Loans to troubled depository institutions entail more risk to the lending Reserve Bank, and depository institutions that are undercapitalized or critically undercapitalized are subject to lending limitations under FDICIA.
Return to text
8. See Artuç and Demiralp (2010).
Return to text
9. See Bernanke (2009a) and Madigan (2009) for a retrospective that elaborates on some of the emergency measures taken during the 2007–09 financial crisis and the reasoning for discount window rate changes during the financial crisis.
Return to text
10. Throughout this crisis, the Board approved numerous reductions in the primary credit rate and narrowed the spread between the primary credit rate and the target federal funds rate twice. With the narrowing of the spread in August 2007 from 100 basis points to 50 basis points and in March 2008 to 25 basis points, the Board announced that the maximum term for primary credit loans would be extended, first to 30 days and then to 90 days, respectively. As economic conditions improved, in 2010, the Board increased the spread between the primary credit rate and the target federal funds rate to 50 basis points and shortened the maximum term for primary credit loans to overnight.
Return to text
11. The TAF provided fixed quantities of term credit to depository institutions through an auction mechanism and seemed to have largely addressed banks' concern that borrowing from the Federal Reserve would imply weakness. According to Bernanke (2009b, paragraph 7), this was "partly because the sizable number of borrowers provides a greater assurance of anonymity, and possibly also because the three-day period between the auction and auction settlement suggests that the facility's users are not using it to meet acute funding needs on a particular day."
Return to text
12. See section 1103 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which amended section 11 of the Federal Reserve Act.
Return to text
13. The Board's H.4.1 statistical release, "
Factors Affecting Reserve Balances of Depository Institutions and Condition Statement of Federal Reserve Banks
," is published weekly. It presents a balance sheet for each Federal Reserve Bank, a consolidated balance sheet for all 12 Reserve Banks, an associated statement that lists the factors affecting reserve balances of depository institutions, and several other tables presenting information on the assets, liabilities, and commitments of the Federal Reserve Banks. For additional details on the consolidation of "loans" into a broader category of assets, see the March 19, 2020, H.4.1 announcement, available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41/20200319
.
Return to text
14. As with the discount window, an eligible institution participated in the BTFP through its local Reserve Bank. The legal agreements and process for pledging securities in the BTFP also relied on those used in discount window lending. Nevertheless, the BTFP differed from the discount window in various ways, including the term of lending, scope of eligible collateral, collateral valuation, and interest rate. For more information on the differences between the BTFP and the discount window, see the response to question A.3 in Board of Governors (2024a, p. 3). For additional details on the BTFP, see the March 12, 2023, press release (Board of Governors, 2023).
Return to text
15. See Board of Governors and others (2023).
Return to text
16. The statistics in this paragraph are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/discount-window-readiness.htm
.
Return to text
17. More information on Ask the Fed is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's website at
https://bsr.stlouisfed.org/askthefed/Auth/Logon
.
Return to text
18. Additional details on Discount Window Direct can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank Services website at
https://www.frbservices.org/central-bank/lending-central
.
Return to text
19. See the information on discount window operations in section II.A of Board of Governors (2024b).
Return to text


Discurso 10
==================================================
October 08, 2024
A History of the Fed's Discount Window: 1913–2000
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At Davidson College, Davidson, North Carolina
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, President Hicks and Tara Boehmler, for the kind introduction.
1
Let me start by saying that I am saddened by the tragic loss of life, destruction, and damage resulting from Hurricane Helene in North Carolina, and throughout this region. My thoughts are with the people and communities affected, including those in the Davidson College family. For our part, the Federal Reserve and other federal and state financial regulatory agencies are working with banks and credit unions in the affected area to help make sure they can continue to meet the financial services needs of their communities.
I am happy to be back at Davidson College. This is a special community. I am bound to it by a shared experience defined not by its length, but by its intensity. As I visited with you today, and as I look around this hall, I see the faces of colleagues who became dear friends during the COVID-19 pandemic. Back then, we spoke often about the unprecedented uncertainty we faced. Amidst that uncertainty, however, we supported each other on this campus. Now, looking back, we can attest that this mutual support was vital. I am grateful to have been amongst you during that unprecedented time. Today, I am proud to see that Davidson is stronger than ever.
I am excited to be here with you this evening and to talk to you about the history of the Federal Reserve's discount window.
2
The discount window is one of the tools the Fed uses to support the liquidity and stability of the banking system, and to implement monetary policy effectively. It was created in 1913 when the Fed was established. Today, more than 110 years later, this tool continues to play an important role. At the Fed, we always look for ways to improve our tools, including our discount window operations. Recently, the Fed published a request for information document to receive feedback from the public regarding operational aspects of the discount window and intraday credit.
3
Today, I will do three things. First, I will discuss briefly my outlook for the U.S. economy. Second, I will offer my historical perspective on the discount window, starting in 1913 and ending in 2000. Finally, I will provide a few details about the request for information the Fed recently published.
Tomorrow, I will say more about the discount window when I speak at the Charlotte Economics Club.
Economic Outlook and Considerations for Monetary Policy
Economic activity continues to grow at a solid pace. Inflation has eased substantially. The labor market has cooled from its formerly overheated state.
Slide 1
Slide 2
As you can see in
slide 3
, personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices rose 2.2 percent over the 12 months ending in August, well down from 6.5 percent two years earlier. Excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.7 percent, compared with 5.2 percent two years earlier. Our restrictive monetary policy stance played a role in restraining demand and in keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of inflation surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets. Inflation is now much closer to the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent objective. I expect that we will continue to make progress toward that goal.
While, overall, the economy continues to grow at a solid pace, the labor market has modestly cooled. Employers added an average of 186,000 jobs per month during July through September, a slower pace than seen early this year. A shown in
slide 4
, the unemployment rate now stands at 4.1 percent, up from 3.8 percent in September 2023. Meanwhile, job openings declined by about 4 million since their peak in March 2022. The good news is that the rise in unemployment has been limited and gradual, and the level of unemployment remains historically low. Even so, the cooling in the labor market is noticeable.
Congress mandated the Fed to pursue maximum employment and price stability. The balance of risks to our two mandates has changed—as risks to inflation have diminished and risks to employment have risen, these risks have been brought roughly into balance. The FOMC has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent goal. To maintain the strength of the labor market, my FOMC colleagues and I recalibrated our policy stance last month, lowering our policy interest rate by 1/2 percentage point, as shown in
slide 5
.
Looking ahead, I will carefully watch incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks when considering additional adjustments to the federal funds target range, our primary tool for adjusting the stance of monetary policy. My approach to monetary policymaking is to make decisions meeting by meeting. As the economy evolves, I will continue to update my thinking about policy to best promote maximum employment and price stability.
Discount Window History
1913: The Fed was established
Now, I will turn to my perspective on the history of the discount window. Understanding this history is important as we consider ways to ensure the discount window continues to serve effectively in its critical role of providing liquidity to the banking system as the economy and financial system evolve.
Before the Federal Reserve was founded, the U.S. experienced frequent financial panics. One example is illustrated in
slide 6
with a newspaper clipping from the Rocky Mountain Times printed on July 19, 1893. It depicts panic swirling against banks at a time when bank runs swept through midwestern and western cities such as Chicago, Denver, and Los Angeles. The illustration shows how waves of panic hit public confidence, the rocks in the picture, and how banks have a fortress mentality. They stand strong against the panic, but they are not lending, and they are isolated.
Back then, the supply of money to the economy was inelastic in the short term, in part because the monetary system in the U.S. was based on the gold standard. Demand for cash, however, varied over the course of the year and was particularly strong during harvest season, when crops were brought to the market. The surge in demand for cash, combined with the inelastic supply of money in the short term, caused financial conditions to tighten seasonally. The banking system was fairly good at moving money to where it needed to go, but it had little scope to expand the total amount of money available in response to the U.S. economy's needs. So if a shock hit the economy when financial conditions were already tight, then the banking system struggled to provide the extra liquidity needed. Banks would seek to preserve liquidity by reducing their investments and denying loan requests, for example. Depositors, fearful that they might not be able to access their funds when they needed them, would rush to withdraw their money. Of course, that caused the banks to conserve further on liquidity. In some cases, they simply closed their doors until the storm passed. When banks closed their doors, economic activity would contract.
4
Activity would recover when the banks reopened, but the economic suffering in the meantime was meaningful.
In addition to the supply of money in the economy being inelastic in the short term, two prominent frictions, asymmetric information and externalities, made banks and private markets vulnerable to systemic crises. Here, asymmetric information refers to the fact that customers do not have access to all the information they need to evaluate whether a bank is insolvent, illiquid, or both.
5
Therefore, customers rely on imperfect signals, such as news reports about another bank failing, to decide whether to withdraw their money from their own bank.
Then there are externalities, in the sense that an individual bank may not consider how an innocent bystander may be negatively impacted by its actions. When a financial institution fails, that may lead depositors to withdraw money from other unrelated banks, which may in turn cause those banks to fail. Contagion can transform a single bank failure into a systemic crisis, where many banks fail, credit evaporates, the stock market collapses, the economy enters a recession, and the unemployment rate increases dramatically.
The severe financial panic of 1907 stands out as an example of market failure due to these two prominent frictions. The panic was triggered by a series of bad banking decisions that led to a frenzy of withdrawals caused by asymmetric information and public distrust in the liquidity of the banking system.
6
Banks in many large cities, including financial centers such as New York and Chicago, simply stopped sending payments outside of their communities. The resulting disruption in the payment system and to the flow of liquidity through the banking system led to a severe, though short-lived, economic contraction. This experience led Congress to pass the Federal Reserve Act in 1913.
7
This act created the Federal Reserve System, composed of the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, D.C., and 12 Federal Reserve Banks across the country.
8
In 1913, the main monetary policy tool at the Fed's disposal was the discount window. At that time, the Fed did not use open market operations—the buying and selling of government securities in the open market—to conduct monetary policy. Instead, the Fed adjusted the money supply by lending directly to banks that needed funds through the discount window. The Fed's ability to provide funds to banks as needed made the money supply of the U.S. more elastic and considerably reduced the seasonal volatility in interest rates.
9
This ability also enabled the Fed to provide stability in times of stress, helping banks that experienced rapid withdrawals to satisfy their customers' demand for liquidity and thereby potentially preventing banking panics.
1920s: The Fed began to discourage strongly use of the discount window
In fact, many researchers have argued that the existence of the Fed's discount window prevented a financial crisis in the early 1920s, when the banking sector came under pressure as the U.S. economy transitioned to a peacetime economy following the end of World War I.
10
There had been an agricultural boom during the war and a significant accumulation of debt within that sector. Farmers came under pressure as the prices of agricultural goods dropped from wartime highs. The banks sought to support their customers, and the Fed sought to support the banks. There were serious concerns about the condition of several banks in parts of the country. The Fed's discount window lending provided critical support that saved many banks but also resulted in habitual use of the discount window by some banks during the 1920s.
11
Slide 7
shows that as of August 1925, 593 member banks, 6 percent of the total, had been borrowing for a year or more from Federal Reserve Banks. Moreover, there were real solvency problems, and several banks failed with discount window loans outstanding. These challenges resulted in the Fed strongly discouraging banks from continuous borrowing from the discount window and the adoption of a policy of encouraging a "reluctance to borrow."
12
By 1926, the Fed was explicit that borrowing at the discount window was meant to be short term. As I emphasize in
slide 8
, the Federal Reserve's annual report for 1926 stated that while continuous borrowing by a member bank may be necessary, depending on local economic conditions, "the funds of the Federal reserve banks are primarily intended to be used in meeting the seasonal and temporary requirements of members, and continuous borrowing by a member bank as a general practice would not be consistent with the intent of the Federal reserve act."
13
The late 1920s also highlighted Fed concerns about the purpose of the borrowing. The Fed sought to distinguish between "speculative security loans" and loans for "legitimate business."
14
A staff reappraisal of the discount mechanism stated that "[t]he controversy over direct pressure intensified in the latter part of the 1920s as an increasing flow of bank credit went into the stock market."
15
In short, the Fed observed that some banks were becoming habitual borrowers from the discount window. It was concerned that an overreliance on discount window borrowings would weaken banks and make them more prone to failure.
In the late 1920s, the Fed switched to open market operations as its primary tool for conducting monetary policy.
16
That allowed the Fed to determine the aggregate amount of liquidity in the system and to rely on private financial markets to distribute it efficiently. The discount window would thus serve as a safety valve if there was a shock that caused conditions to tighten unexpectedly or if individual banks experienced idiosyncratic shocks or somehow lost access to interbank markets.
The intention of this set-up was for banks to use the discount window to borrow from the Fed only occasionally. Ordinarily and predominantly, financial institutions were supposed to rely on private markets for their funding. This set-up was designed to limit moral hazard—the possibility that institutions take unnecessary risks when there is no market discipline. This is the key balancing act. The Fed needs to be a reliable backstop to prevent financial crises, but it also needs to minimize moral hazard that comes from always standing ready to provide support.
1930s–1940s: The Great Depression and WWII
During the Great Depression in the 1930s, the banking system experienced severe stress, including many bank runs. There are many reasons why the discount window was insufficient to address the problems in the banking system in the 1930s. I will highlight only two. First, many banks were insolvent rather than illiquid. Central bank lending is not a fundamental solution in those circumstances. When banks are insolvent, it is important to manage the closure in as orderly a manner as possible. The establishment of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in 1933 gave bank regulators increased ability to do that. Relatedly, the challenging experiences of lending to troubled banks in the 1920s likely made the Fed more reluctant to lend in circumstances in which solvency concerns were material. Second, the types of collateral that the Fed was initially able to accept when lending to banks were quite limited.
In response, in the early 1930s Congress expanded the range of banking assets that could serve as collateral for discount window loans and added a variety of new Fed emergency lending authorities.
17
These new lending authorities were used in the 1930s to help alleviate distress. Some were also used in the early 1940s as the Fed helped support the World War II mobilization effort.
The period following the war was relatively calm. The role of the discount window shifted from addressing distress in the banking system to acting as a safety valve to manage tightness in money markets and support monetary policy operations.
1950–2000: Measures to discourage discount window borrowing
In March 1951, the U.S. Treasury and the Fed reached an agreement to separate government debt management from the conduct of monetary policy, thereby laying the foundation for the modern Fed.
18
In the 1950s, the Fed set the interest rate on discount window loans above market rates. Thus, it served as an effective ceiling on the federal funds rate. The Fed continued to discourage extensive use of the discount window, but the relatively high interest rate also made its sustained use less attractive.
In the 1960s, the Fed placed greater emphasis on open market operations to set its monetary policy stance. Concurrently, the Fed shifted to a policy of setting the interest rate on discount window loans below the market rates. Because the interest rate no longer deterred use of the window, the Fed turned increasingly to other measures, such as administrative pressures and moral suasion, to limit the frequency with which banks requested loans from the discount window. Indeed, between the late 1920s and the 1980s, the Fed adopted and amended numerous restrictions on discount window borrowing. Whenever discount window usage increased too much, the Fed tightened the restrictions to suppress borrowing.
For example, in the 1950s, the Fed defined appropriate and inappropriate discount window borrowing. In particular, the Board's regulations in 1955 stated that "[u]nder ordinary conditions, the continuous use of Federal Reserve credit by a member bank over a considerable period of time is not regarded as appropriate" and provided more details on how Reserve Banks should evaluate the "purpose" of a credit request.
19
By 1973, the Board had made additional changes to its regulations on discount window use and defined three distinct discount window programs: adjustment credit, intended to help depository institutions meet short-term liquidity needs; seasonal credit, intended to help small depository institutions manage liquidity needs that arise from seasonal swings in loans and deposits; and extended credit, intended to help depository institutions that have somewhat longer-term liquidity needs resulting from exceptional circumstances.
20
Over time, the Board added provisions in its regulations requiring banks to exhaust other sources of funding before using discount window credit.
21
In addition, in the early 1980s, the Fed levied a surcharge on frequent borrowings by large banks to augment the administrative restrictions.
22
Despite these policies to discourage use of the discount window,
slide 9
shows that discount window borrowing, adjusted for the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, was notable in the 1970s and 1980s, suggesting that the discount window was an important marginal source of funding for banks during that period.
That changed in the 1980s and early 1990s, when there were notable solvency problems in the banking industry. During this period, the discount window provided support to troubled institutions, while the FDIC sought to find merger partners or otherwise manage the failure of these institutions in an orderly manner. The discount window activity that took place while FDIC resolutions proceeded increased the association between use of the discount window and being a troubled institution.
23
As a result, banks became more reluctant to borrow from the discount window. The greater reluctance to borrow from the discount window made it less effective, both as a monetary policy tool and as a crisis-fighting tool. That resulted in a series of efforts by the Fed in the early 2000s to change how the discount window operates. Tomorrow, I will discuss those efforts when I speak at the Charlotte Economics Club.
A request for information
Before closing, I'd like to return to where I began. Understanding the history of the discount window is important as we consider ways to ensure it continues to serve effectively in its critical role in providing liquidity to the banking system as the economy and financial system evolve. One way to ensure it continues to serve effectively is to collect feedback from the public.
Slide 10
provides some touch points on the Board's request for information document. The request for information seeks feedback from the public on a range of operational practices for the discount window and intraday credit, including the collection of legal documents; the process for pledging and withdrawing collateral; the process for requesting, receiving and repaying discount window advances; the extension of intraday credit; and Reserve Bank communications practices. My colleagues and I are looking forward to this feedback to inform potential future enhancements to discount window operations. The period for responding to our request for information ends on December 9, 2024.
Thank you to the event organizers and to the Davidson College community for the opportunity to discuss this important topic with you. It has been such a pleasure to be back on campus.
References
Anderson, Clay (1971). "
Evolution of the Role and the Functioning of the Discount Mechanism
," in
Reappraisal of the Federal Reserve Discount Mechanism,
vol. 1. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pp. 133–65.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1922).
8th Annual Report, 1921
.
Washington: Government Printing Office.
——— (1926).
Federal Reserve Bulletin
,
vol. 12 (July).
——— (1927).
13th Annual Report, 1926
.
Washington: Government Printing Office.
Carlson, Mark (forthcoming).
The Young Fed: The Banking Crises of the 1920s and the Making of a Lender of Last Resort.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Clouse, James (1994). "
Recent Developments in Discount Window Policy (PDF)
,"
Federal Reserve Bulletin,
vol. 80 (November), pp. 965–77.
Goodhart, Charles A.E. (1988).
The Evolution of Central Banks
. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Gorton, Gary (1988). "Banking Panics and Business Cycles,"
Oxford Economic Papers,
vol. 40 (December), pp. 751–81.
Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick (2013). "
The Federal Reserve and Financial Regulation: The First Hundred Years
," NBER Working Paper Series 19292. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August.
Meltzer, Allan (2003).
A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913–1951.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Miron, Jeffrey A. (1986). "Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate, and the Founding of the Fed,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 76 (March), pp. 125–40.
Meulendyke, Ann-Marie (1992). "
Reserve Requirements and the Discount Window in Recent Decades (PDF)
," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
Quarterly Review,
vol. 17 (Autumn), pp. 25–43.
Shull, Bernard (1971). "
Report on Research Undertaken in Connection with a System Study
," in
Reappraisal of the Federal Reserve Discount Mechanism,
vol. 1. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, pp. 27–77.
Terrell, Ellen (2021). "
United Copper, Wall Street, and the Panic of 1907
," Library of Congress,
Inside Adams: Science, Technology & Business
(blog), March 9.
Willis, Henry Parker (1923).
The Federal Reserve System: Legislation, Organization and Operation.
New York: The Ronald Press Company.
1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. The discount window is a monetary policy facility where depository institutions can request to borrow money against collateral from the Fed. The term "window" originates with the now obsolete practice of sending a bank representative to a Reserve Bank physical teller window when a bank needed to borrow money. The term "discount" refers to how depository institutions borrow money on a discount basis—interest amount for the entire loan period (plus other charges, if any) is deducted from the principal at the time a loan is disbursed.
Return to text
3. The Federal Reserve provides intraday credit to depository institutions to foster a safe and efficient payment system. For more information on intraday credit and the Board's Payment System Risk policy, see "Payment System Risk" on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/psr_about.htm
.
Return to text
4. See, for example, Goodhart (1988).
Return to text
5. Illiquidity is a short-term cash flow problem. An illiquid bank cannot pay its current obligations, such as deposit withdrawals, even though the value of the bank's assets exceeds the value of its liabilities. In other words, illiquidity means the bank does not currently have the resources to meet its current obligations. With a short-term loan, an illiquid bank would be able to pay its obligations. Insolvency is a long-term balance sheet problem. Total obligations of an insolvent bank are larger than its total assets. A short-term loan would not help an insolvent bank. Of course, evaluating the quality of a bank's loan book in real time to determine whether a bank is solvent can be extremely challenging during a crisis. In addition, in some cases, illiquidity caused by large deposit withdrawals can lead banks to sell assets at fire-sale prices that then impairs their solvency. Conversely, concerns about insolvency, even if unfounded, can lead to liquidity problems. In the bank run literature, the connections between liquidity and solvency are a key factor that gives rise to runs.
Return to text
6. The panic of 1907 started in October 1907 when three brothers—F. Augustus Heinze, Otto Heinze, and Arthur P. Heinze—as well as Charles W. Morse attempted to manipulate the price of United Copper stock by purchasing a large number of shares of the company. Their plan failed, and the stock price of United Copper collapsed. The collapse led to depositor runs on banks and trust companies associated with the Heinzes and Morse. This included a run on the Knickerbocker Trust Company, whose president was connected to Morse. The Knickerbocker Trust Company failed, and the New York Stock Exchange fell nearly 50 percent from its peak of the previous year in the wake of the failure. See Terrell (2021).
Return to text
7. To aid its thinking on reforming the monetary system, Congress established the National Monetary Commission. The landmark 24 volume report from the commission provides a rich review of the operations of central banks in other countries, a history of financial crises in the U.S., and an appraisal of the state of the contemporary banking system in the U.S. at the time.
Return to text
8. See "History and Purpose of the Federal Reserve" on the St. Louis Fed's website at
https://www.stlouisfed.org/in-plain-english/history-and-purpose-of-the-fed
.
Return to text
9. See Miron (1986).
Return to text
10. See, for example, Gorton (1988). Willis (1923) and Board of Governors (1922) also suggest that the Fed prevented a crisis from happening in 1920.
Return to text
11. See Carlson (forthcoming).
Return to text
12. See Shull (1971, pp. 33–34).
Return to text
13. See Board of Governors (1927, p. 4). In 1926, approximately one-third of all banks in the U.S. were member banks, holding about 60 percent of the total loans and investments for all banks; see Board of Governors (1926). Banks receiving charters from the federal government were required to become members of the Federal Reserve System while banks receiving charters from state governments had the option to become members. Discount window borrowing was originally limited to Federal Reserve System member banks. The Monetary Control Act of 1980 opened the window to all depository institutions.
Return to text
14. See Gorton and Metrick (2013).
Return to text
15. See Anderson (1971, p. 137). In the statement, "direct pressure" refers to the Fed policy of pressuring banks not to borrow from the window. Congress may have shared some of those concerns, as the Federal Reserve Act was amended in 1933 to include a passage in section 4 requiring Reserve Banks to be careful about speculative uses of the Federal Reserve credit.
Return to text
16. Open market operations are the purchase or sale of securities (for example, U.S. Treasury bonds) in the open market by the Fed. In modern times, the short-term objective for open market operations is specified by the FOMC. For more information, please refer to "Open Market Operations" on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/openmarket.htm
.
Return to text
17. There are several banking acts that do this, but especially the Banking Act of 1932, the Emergency Relief and Construction Act of 1932, and the Banking Act of 1935. Yet one more reason why the discount window was insufficient to address the problems of the banking system in the 1930s is that, during this period, nonmember banks did not have access to the discount window. These banks suffered the most during the Great Depression. The ability of nonmember banks to access the window only changed in 1980 with the Monetary Control Act.
Return to text
18. After the U.S. entered World War II, the Federal Reserve supported efforts by the Treasury to hold down the cost of financing the war by establishing caps on interest rates on Treasury securities (see, for instance, Meltzer, 2003, Chapter 7). The cap pertaining to longer-term interest rates continued to be in place until the 1951 agreement.
Return to text
19. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Advances and Discounts by Federal Reserve Banks, 20 Fed. Reg. 261, 263 (PDF)
(Jan. 12, 1955).
Return to text
20. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks, 38 Fed. Reg. 9065, 9076-9077 (PDF)
(April 10, 1973).
Return to text
21. By 1980, the Board's regulations stated that adjustment credit "generally is available only after reasonable alternative sources of funds, including credit from special industry lenders, such as Federal Home Loan Banks, the National Credit Union Administration's Central Liquidity Facility, and corporate central credit unions have been fully used"; seasonal credit was "available only if similar assistance is not available from other special industry lenders"; and other extended credit was available only "where similar assistance is not reasonably available from other sources, including special industry lenders"; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Extensions of Credit by Federal Reserve Banks, 45 Fed. Reg. 54009, 54009-54011 (PDF)
(Aug. 14, 1980). See also Clouse (1994).
Return to text
22. See Meulendyke (1992).
Return to text
23. A congressional inquiry found that this lending likely increased losses to the deposit insurance funds at the time and led to limitations on the ability of the Federal Reserve to provide loans to troubled depository institutions as part of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 11
==================================================
September 30, 2024
Economic Outlook
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Nashville, Tennessee
Share
Watch Live
I have some brief comments on the economy and monetary policy and look forward to our discussion.
Our economy is strong overall and has made significant progress over the past two years toward achieving our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. Labor market conditions are solid, having cooled from their previously overheated state. Inflation has eased, and my Federal Open Market Committee colleagues and I have greater confidence that it is on a sustainable path to 2 percent. At our meeting earlier this month, we reduced the level of policy restraint by lowering the target range of the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point. That decision reflects our growing confidence that, with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, strength in the labor market can be maintained in an environment of moderate economic growth and inflation moving sustainably down to our objective.
Recent Economic Data
The labor market
Many indicators show the labor market is solid. To mention just a few, the unemployment rate is well within the range of estimates of its natural rate. Layoffs are low. The labor force participation rate of individuals aged 25 to 54 (so-called prime age) is near its historic high, and the prime-age women's participation rate has continued to reach new all-time highs. Real wages are increasing at a solid pace, broadly in line with gains in productivity. The ratio of job openings to unemployed workers has moved down steadily but remains just above 1—so that there are still more open positions than there are people seeking work. Prior to 2019, that was rarely the case.
Still, labor market conditions have clearly cooled over the past year. Workers now view jobs as somewhat less available than they were in 2019. The moderation in job growth and the increase in labor supply have led the unemployment rate to increase to 4.2 percent, still low by historical standards. We do not believe that we need to see further cooling in labor market conditions to achieve 2 percent inflation.
Inflation
Over the most recent 12 months, headline and core inflation were 2.2 percent and 2.7 percent, respectively. Disinflation has been broad based, and recent data indicate further progress toward a sustained return to 2 percent. Core goods prices have fallen 0.5 percent over the past year, close to their pre-pandemic pace, as supply bottlenecks have eased. Outside of housing, core services inflation is also close to its pre-pandemic pace. Housing services inflation continues to decline, but sluggishly. The growth rate in rents charged to new tenants remains low. As long as that remains the case, housing services inflation will continue to decline.
Broader economic conditions also set the table for further disinflation. The labor market is now roughly in balance. Longer-run inflation expectations remain well anchored.
Monetary Policy
Over the past year, we have continued to see solid growth and healthy gains in the labor force and productivity. Our goal all along has been to restore price stability without the kind of painful rise in unemployment that has frequently accompanied efforts to bring down high inflation. That would be a highly desirable result for the communities, families, and businesses we serve. While the task is not complete, we have made a good deal of progress toward that outcome.
For much of the past three years, inflation ran well above our goal, and the labor market was extremely tight. Appropriately, our focus was on bringing down inflation. By keeping monetary policy restrictive, we helped restore the balance between overall supply and demand in the economy. That patient approach has paid dividends: Inflation is now much closer to our 2 percent objective. Today, we see the risks to achieving our employment and inflation goals as roughly in balance.
Our policy rate had been at a two-decade high since the July 2023 meeting. At the time of that meeting, core inflation was above 4 percent, well above our target, and unemployment was 3.5 percent, near a 50-year low. In the 14 months since, inflation has moved down, and unemployment has moved up, in both cases significantly. It was time for a recalibration of our policy stance to reflect progress toward our goals as well as the changed balance of risks.
As I mentioned, our decision to reduce our policy rate by 50 basis points reflects our growing confidence that, with an appropriate recalibration of our policy stance, strength in the labor market can be maintained in a context of moderate economic growth and inflation moving sustainably down to 2 percent.
Looking forward, if the economy evolves broadly as expected, policy will move over time toward a more neutral stance. But we are not on any preset course. The risks are two-sided, and we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting. As we consider additional policy adjustments, we will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. Overall, the economy is in solid shape; we intend to use our tools to keep it there.
We remain resolute in our commitment to our maximum-employment and price-stability mandates. Everything we do is in service to our public mission.
Thank you. I look forward to our conversation.


Discurso 12
==================================================
September 26, 2024
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the 10th Annual U.S. Treasury Market Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York (via prerecorded video)
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Hello, everyone, and welcome to the 10th Annual U.S. Treasury Market Conference. "Tenth annual" is a phrase that generates a bit of surprise, and much pride. It is surprising because it does not seem like the first of these gatherings, which I was honored to play a role in organizing, was all that long ago. But we can also take pride because the conference has proven useful and important for a full decade, as I expect it will do for many more years to come.
Much has changed in the economy since we first gathered in 2015—but the importance of the U.S. Treasury market has not. As you all know, this market is the deepest and most liquid in the world. In addition to meeting the financing needs of the federal government, it plays a critical role in the implementation of monetary policy. It is no exaggeration to say that the Treasury market is part of the bedrock of our economy and indeed of the world economy.
The October '14 flash crash and the subsequent publication of the Interagency Working Group report on that event are what brought us together for the first annual conference.
1
October 2014 was a wakeup call because there had never been such a large swing in Treasury prices in such a short period of time. The Interagency Working Group report shed light on how much the structure of the Treasury market had changed and how large a role high-speed, electronic trading firms were playing in it. It also showed the value of cooperation and communication between the five agencies in the working group, something that proved again to be vital during the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
I am pleased to see that all working group members are represented here today. You will be hearing directly from many senior leaders, including your host, President Williams; Vice Chair Barr; and Secretary Yellen, who, of course, was Fed chair at the time of the first conference.
It is essential that our Treasury markets are able to efficiently transform Treasury securities into cash, even at times of elevated stress. As I noted at this event in 2015, "these markets need to keep functioning at a high level, and we all have a stake in making sure that they do." I remain wholly dedicated to that goal.
2
I wish you a productive and educational conference. Thank you.
1. See Interagency Working Group on Treasury Market Surveillance,
Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014
(PDF)
(Washington: Interagency Working Group, July 2015).
Return to text
2. See Jerome H. Powell,
"Opening Remarks"
(speech at the 2015 Roundtable on Treasury Markets and Debt Management: Evolution of Treasury Market and Its Implications, New York, NY, November 20, 2015).
Return to text
i. Note: On September 26, 2024, the text of the speech was updated to reflect the delivered remarks in the video version of this speech.


Discurso 13
==================================================
September 26, 2024
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the 10th Annual U.S. Treasury Market Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York (via prerecorded video)
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Hello, everyone, and welcome to the 10th Annual U.S. Treasury Market Conference. "Tenth annual" is a phrase that generates a bit of surprise, and much pride. It is surprising because it does not seem like the first of these gatherings, which I was honored to play a role in organizing, was all that long ago. But we can also take pride because the conference has proven useful and important for a full decade, as I expect it will do for many more years to come.
Much has changed in the economy since we first gathered in 2015—but the importance of the U.S. Treasury market has not. As you all know, this market is the deepest and most liquid in the world. In addition to meeting the financing needs of the federal government, it plays a critical role in the implementation of monetary policy. It is no exaggeration to say that the Treasury market is part of the bedrock of our economy and indeed of the world economy.
The October '14 flash crash and the subsequent publication of the Interagency Working Group report on that event are what brought us together for the first annual conference.
1
October 2014 was a wakeup call because there had never been such a large swing in Treasury prices in such a short period of time. The Interagency Working Group report shed light on how much the structure of the Treasury market had changed and how large a role high-speed, electronic trading firms were playing in it. It also showed the value of cooperation and communication between the five agencies in the working group, something that proved again to be vital during the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
I am pleased to see that all working group members are represented here today. You will be hearing directly from many senior leaders, including your host, President Williams; Vice Chair Barr; and Secretary Yellen, who, of course, was Fed chair at the time of the first conference.
It is essential that our Treasury markets are able to efficiently transform Treasury securities into cash, even at times of elevated stress. As I noted at this event in 2015, "these markets need to keep functioning at a high level, and we all have a stake in making sure that they do." I remain wholly dedicated to that goal.
2
I wish you a productive and educational conference. Thank you.
1. See Interagency Working Group on Treasury Market Surveillance,
Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014
(PDF)
(Washington: Interagency Working Group, July 2015).
Return to text
2. See Jerome H. Powell,
"Opening Remarks"
(speech at the 2015 Roundtable on Treasury Markets and Debt Management: Evolution of Treasury Market and Its Implications, New York, NY, November 20, 2015).
Return to text
i. Note: On September 26, 2024, the text of the speech was updated to reflect the delivered remarks in the video version of this speech.


Discurso 14
==================================================
August 23, 2024
Review and Outlook
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At “Reassessing the Effectiveness and Transmission of Monetary Policy,” an economic symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming
Share
Watch Live
Four and a half years after COVID-19's arrival, the worst of the pandemic-related economic distortions are fading. Inflation has declined significantly. The labor market is no longer overheated, and conditions are now less tight than those that prevailed before the pandemic. Supply constraints have normalized. And the balance of the risks to our two mandates has changed. Our objective has been to restore price stability while maintaining a strong labor market, avoiding the sharp increases in unemployment that characterized earlier disinflationary episodes when inflation expectations were less well anchored. While the task is not complete, we have made a good deal of progress toward that outcome.
Today, I will begin by addressing the current economic situation and the path ahead for monetary policy. I will then turn to a discussion of economic events since the pandemic arrived, exploring why inflation rose to levels not seen in a generation, and why it has fallen so much while unemployment has remained low.
Near-Term Outlook for Policy
Let's begin with the current situation and the near-term outlook for policy.
For much of the past three years, inflation ran well above our 2 percent goal, and labor market conditions were extremely tight. The Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) primary focus has been on bringing down inflation, and appropriately so. Prior to this episode, most Americans alive today had not experienced the pain of high inflation for a sustained period. Inflation brought substantial hardship, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. High inflation triggered stress and a sense of unfairness that linger today.
1
Our restrictive monetary policy helped restore balance between aggregate supply and demand, easing inflationary pressures and ensuring that inflation expectations remained well anchored. Inflation is now much closer to our objective, with prices having risen 2.5 percent over the past 12 months (
figure 1
).
2
After a pause earlier this year, progress toward our 2 percent objective has resumed. My confidence has grown that inflation is on a sustainable path back to 2 percent.
Turning to employment, in the years just prior to the pandemic, we saw the significant benefits to society that can come from a long period of strong labor market conditions: low unemployment, high participation, historically low racial employment gaps, and, with inflation low and stable, healthy real wage gains that were increasingly concentrated among those with lower incomes.
3
Today, the labor market has cooled considerably from its formerly overheated state. The unemployment rate began to rise over a year ago and is now at 4.3 percent—still low by historical standards, but almost a full percentage point above its level in early 2023 (
figure 2
). Most of that increase has come over the past six months. So far, rising unemployment has not been the result of elevated layoffs, as is typically the case in an economic downturn. Rather, the increase mainly reflects a substantial increase in the supply of workers and a slowdown from the previously frantic pace of hiring. Even so, the cooling in labor market conditions is unmistakable. Job gains remain solid but have slowed this year.
4
Job vacancies have fallen, and the ratio of vacancies to unemployment has returned to its pre-pandemic range. The hiring and quits rates are now below the levels that prevailed in 2018 and 2019. Nominal wage gains have moderated. All told, labor market conditions are now less tight than just before the pandemic in 2019—a year when inflation ran below 2 percent. It seems unlikely that the labor market will be a source of elevated inflationary pressures anytime soon. We do not seek or welcome further cooling in labor market conditions.
Overall, the economy continues to grow at a solid pace. But the inflation and labor market data show an evolving situation. The upside risks to inflation have diminished. And the downside risks to employment have increased. As we highlighted in our last FOMC statement, we are attentive to the risks to both sides of our dual mandate.
The time has come for policy to adjust. The direction of travel is clear, and the timing and pace of rate cuts will depend on incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks.
We will do everything we can to support a strong labor market as we make further progress toward price stability. With an appropriate dialing back of policy restraint, there is good reason to think that the economy will get back to 2 percent inflation while maintaining a strong labor market. The current level of our policy rate gives us ample room to respond to any risks we may face, including the risk of unwelcome further weakening in labor market conditions.
The Rise and Fall of Inflation
Let's now turn to the questions of why inflation rose, and why it has fallen so significantly even as unemployment has remained low. There is a growing body of research on these questions, and this is a good time for this discussion.
5
It is, of course, too soon to make definitive assessments. This period will be analyzed and debated long after we are gone.
The arrival of the COVID-19 pandemic led quickly to shutdowns in economies around the world. It was a time of radical uncertainty and severe downside risks. As so often happens in times of crisis, Americans adapted and innovated. Governments responded with extraordinary force, especially in the U.S. Congress unanimously passed the CARES Act. At the Fed, we used our powers to an unprecedented extent to stabilize the financial system and help stave off an economic depression.
After a historically deep but brief recession, in mid-2020 the economy began to grow again. As the risks of a severe, extended downturn receded, and as the economy reopened, we faced the risk of replaying the painfully slow recovery that followed the Global Financial Crisis.
Congress delivered substantial additional fiscal support in late 2020 and again in early 2021. Spending recovered strongly in the first half of 2021. The ongoing pandemic shaped the pattern of the recovery. Lingering concerns over COVID weighed on spending on in-person services. But pent-up demand, stimulative policies, pandemic changes in work and leisure practices, and the additional savings associated with constrained services spending all contributed to a historic surge in consumer spending on goods.
The pandemic also wreaked havoc on supply conditions. Eight million people left the workforce at its onset, and the size of the labor force was still 4 million below its pre-pandemic level in early 2021. The labor force would not return to its pre-pandemic trend until mid-2023 (
figure 3
).
6
Supply chains were snarled by a combination of lost workers, disrupted international trade linkages, and tectonic shifts in the composition and level of demand (
figure 4
). Clearly, this was nothing like the slow recovery after the Global Financial Crisis.
Enter inflation. After running below target through 2020, inflation spiked in March and April 2021. The initial burst of inflation was concentrated rather than broad based, with extremely large price increases for goods in short supply, such as motor vehicles. My colleagues and I judged at the outset that these pandemic-related factors would not be persistent and, thus, that the sudden rise in inflation was likely to pass through fairly quickly without the need for a monetary policy response—in short, that the inflation would be transitory. Standard thinking has long been that, as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored, it can be appropriate for central banks to look through a temporary rise in inflation.
7
The good ship Transitory was a crowded one, with most mainstream analysts and advanced-economy central bankers on board.
8
The common expectation was that supply conditions would improve reasonably quickly, that the rapid recovery in demand would run its course, and that demand would rotate back from goods to services, bringing inflation down.
For a time, the data were consistent with the transitory hypothesis. Monthly readings for core inflation declined every month from April to September 2021, although progress came slower than expected (
figure 5
). The case began to weaken around midyear, as was reflected in our communications. Beginning in October, the data turned hard against the transitory hypothesis.
9
Inflation rose and broadened out from goods into services. It became clear that the high inflation was not transitory, and that it would require a strong policy response if inflation expectations were to remain well anchored. We recognized that and pivoted beginning in November. Financial conditions began to tighten. After phasing out our asset purchases, we lifted off in March 2022.
By early 2022, headline inflation exceeded 6 percent, with core inflation above 5 percent. New supply shocks appeared. Russia's invasion of Ukraine led to a sharp increase in energy and commodity prices. The improvements in supply conditions and rotation in demand from goods to services were taking much longer than expected, in part due to further COVID waves in the U.S.
10
And COVID continued to disrupt production globally, including through new and extended lockdowns in China.
11
High rates of inflation were a global phenomenon, reflecting common experiences: rapid increases in the demand for goods, strained supply chains, tight labor markets, and sharp hikes in commodity prices.
12
The global nature of inflation was unlike any period since the 1970s. Back then, high inflation became entrenched—an outcome we were utterly committed to avoiding.
By mid-2022, the labor market was extremely tight, with employment increasing by over 6-1/2 million from the middle of 2021. This increase in labor demand was met, in part, by workers rejoining the labor force as health concerns began to fade. But labor supply remained constrained, and, in the summer of 2022, labor force participation remained well below pre-pandemic levels. There were nearly twice as many job openings as unemployed persons from March 2022 through the end of the year, signaling a severe labor shortage (
figure 6
).
13
Inflation peaked at 7.1 percent in June 2022.
At this podium two years ago, I discussed the possibility that addressing inflation could bring some pain in the form of higher unemployment and slower growth. Some argued that getting inflation under control would require a recession and a lengthy period of high unemployment.
14
I expressed our unconditional commitment to fully restoring price stability and to keeping at it until the job is done.
The FOMC did not flinch from carrying out our responsibilities, and our actions forcefully demonstrated our commitment to restoring price stability. We raised our policy rate by 425 basis points in 2022 and another 100 basis points in 2023. We have held our policy rate at its current restrictive level since July 2023 (
figure 7
).
The summer of 2022 proved to be the peak of inflation. The 4-1/2 percentage point decline in inflation from its peak two years ago has occurred in a context of low unemployment—a welcome and historically unusual result.
How did inflation fall without a sharp rise in unemployment above its estimated natural rate?
Pandemic-related distortions to supply and demand, as well as severe shocks to energy and commodity markets, were important drivers of high inflation, and their reversal has been a key part of the story of its decline. The unwinding of these factors took much longer than expected but ultimately played a large role in the subsequent disinflation. Our restrictive monetary policy contributed to a moderation in aggregate demand, which combined with improvements in aggregate supply to reduce inflationary pressures while allowing growth to continue at a healthy pace. As labor demand also moderated, the historically high level of vacancies relative to unemployment has normalized primarily through a decline in vacancies, without sizable and disruptive layoffs, bringing the labor market to a state where it is no longer a source of inflationary pressures.
A word on the critical importance of inflation expectations. Standard economic models have long reflected the view that inflation will return to its objective when product and labor markets are balanced—without the need for economic slack—so long as inflation expectations are anchored at our objective. That's what the models said, but the stability of longer-run inflation expectations since the 2000s had not been tested by a persistent burst of high inflation. It was far from assured that the inflation anchor would hold. Concerns over de-anchoring contributed to the view that disinflation would require slack in the economy and specifically in the labor market. An important takeaway from recent experience is that anchored inflation expectations, reinforced by vigorous central bank actions, can facilitate disinflation without the need for slack.
This narrative attributes much of the increase in inflation to an extraordinary collision between overheated and temporarily distorted demand and constrained supply. While researchers differ in their approaches and, to some extent, in their conclusions, a consensus seems to be emerging, which I see as attributing most of the rise in inflation to this collision.
15
All told, the healing from pandemic distortions, our efforts to moderate aggregate demand, and the anchoring of expectations have worked together to put inflation on what increasingly appears to be a sustainable path to our 2 percent objective.
Disinflation while preserving labor market strength is only possible with anchored inflation expectations, which reflect the public's confidence that the central bank will bring about 2 percent inflation over time. That confidence has been built over decades and reinforced by our actions.
That is my assessment of events. Your mileage may vary.
Conclusion
Let me wrap up by emphasizing that the pandemic economy has proved to be unlike any other, and that there remains much to be learned from this extraordinary period. Our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy emphasizes our commitment to reviewing our principles and making appropriate adjustments through a thorough public review every five years. As we begin this process later this year, we will be open to criticism and new ideas, while preserving the strengths of our framework. The limits of our knowledge—so clearly evident during the pandemic—demand humility and a questioning spirit focused on learning lessons from the past and applying them flexibly to our current challenges.
References
Aaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). "
Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-072. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
Bai, Xiwen, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Yiliang Li, and Francesco Zanetti (2024). "
The Causal Effects of Global Supply Chain Disruptions on Macroeconomic Outcomes: Evidence and Theory
," NBER Working Paper Series 32098. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February.
Ball, Laurence, Daniel Leigh, and Prachi Mishra (2022). "
Understanding US Inflation during the COVID-19 Era
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Fall, pp. 1–54.
Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Gauti B. Eggertsson (2023). "
It's Baaack: The Surge in Inflation in the 2020s and the Return of the Non-Linear Phillips Curve
," NBER Working Paper Series 31197. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April.
——— (2024). "Insights from the 2020s Inflation Surge: A Tale of Two Curves," paper presented at "Reassessing the Effectiveness and Transmission of Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 22–24.
Binetti, Alberto, Francesco Nuzzi, and Stefanie Stantcheva (2024). "
People's Understanding of Inflation
," NBER Working Paper Series 32497. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June.
Blanchard, Olivier. J., and Ben S. Bernanke (2023). "
What Caused the US Pandemic-Era Inflation?
" NBER Working Paper Series 31417. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June.
——— (2024). "
An Analysis of Pandemic-Era Inflation in 11 Economies
," NBER Working Paper Series 32532. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May.
Cascaldi-Garcia. Danilo, Luca Guerrieri, Matteo Iacoviello, and Michele Modugno (2024). "
Lessons from the Co-Movement of Inflation around the World
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 28.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2023). "Managing Disinflations," paper presented at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 24.
Clarida, Richard (forthcoming). "A Global Perspective on Post Pandemic Inflation and its Retreat: Remarks Prepared for NBER Conference on 'Inflation in the Covid Era',"
Journal of Monetary Economics
.
Crump, Richard K., Stefano Eusepi, Marc Giannoni, and Ayşegül Şahin, (2024). "The Unemployment–Inflation Trade-Off Revisited: The Phillips Curve in COVID Times,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 145, Supplement (July), 103580.
Dao, Mai Chi, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Daniel Leigh, and Prachi Mishra (forthcoming). "Understanding the International Rise and Fall of Inflation since 2020,"
Journal of Monetary Economics.
di Giovanni, Julian, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Alvaro Silva, and Muhammed A. Yildirim (2022). "
Global Supply Chain Pressures, International Trade, and Inflation
," NBER Working Paper Series 30240. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July.
Jaravel, Xavier (2021). "Inflation Inequality: Measurement, Causes, and Policy Implications,"
Annual Review of Economics,
vol. 13, pp. 599–629.
Kaplan, Greg, and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl (2017). "Inflation at the Household Level,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 91 (November), pp. 19–38.
Pfajfar, Damjan, and Fabian Winkler (2024). "
Households' Preferences over Inflation and Monetary Policy Tradeoffs
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2024‑036. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May.
Shiller, Robert J. (1997). "Why Do People Dislike Inflation?" in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds.,
Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 13–65.
Stantcheva, Stefanie (2024). "
Why Do We Dislike Inflation?
" NBER Working Paper Series 32300. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April.
1. Shiller (1997) and Stantcheva (2024) study why people dislike inflation. Pfafjar and Winkler (2024) study households' attitudes toward inflation and unemployment. Binetti, Nuzzi, and Stantcheva (2024) investigate households' attitudes toward, and understanding of, inflation. Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) and Jaravel (2021) document heterogeneity in the inflation rate experienced by households across the income distribution.
Return to text
2. The data for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index is available for June 2024. Over the 12 months to June 2024, the PCE price index increased 2.5 percent. Data for the consumer price index and producer price index are available through July 2024 and can be used to estimate the level of the PCE price index through July. While such an estimate is subject to uncertainty, it suggests that inflation remained near 2.5 percent through July.
Return to text
3. Research documenting such benefits include Aaronson and others (2019), who discuss the experience in the 2010s and review related historical evidence.
Return to text
4. Payroll employment grew by an average of 170,000 per month over the three months ending in July. On August 21, the Bureau of Labor Statistics released the preliminary estimate of the upcoming annual benchmark revision to the establishment survey data, which will be issued in February 2025. The preliminary estimate indicates a downward adjustment to March 2024 total nonfarm employment of 818,000.
Return to text
5. Early examples include Ball, Leigh, and Mishra (2022) and di Giovanni and others (2022). More recent work includes Benigno and Eggertsson (2023, 2024), Blanchard and Bernanke (2023, 2024), Crump and others (2024), Bai and others (2024), and Dao and others (forthcoming).
Return to text
6. The Federal Reserve Board staff's estimate of the labor force makes two adjustments to the Bureau of Labor Statistics' published estimates: (i) reweighing Current Population Survey respondents such that the labor force estimates in all years reflect the Census Bureau's latest vintage of population estimates; and (ii) accounting for net immigration that is likely not fully reflected in the Census Bureau's latest population estimates, as detailed in the CBO's 2024 Demographic Outlook (see
https://www.cbo.gov/publication/59899
). The pre-pandemic trend described here is calculated by appending the CBO's January 2020 projected labor force growth from the start of the pandemic through 2024:Q2 onto the level of the labor force just before the start of the pandemic. (See Congressional Budget Office (2020), The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2020 to 2030;
https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56073
.)
Return to text
7. For example, former Chair Ben Bernanke and Olivier Blanchard summarize the standard approach in their work on inflation the following way: "Standard central banking doctrine holds that, so long as inflation expectations are reasonably well anchored, there is a case for 'looking through' temporary supply shocks rather than responding to the short-run increase in inflation" (Blanchard and Bernanke, 2024, p. 2). Clarida (forthcoming) notes how central banks around the world faced a sharp rise in the relative price of goods and chose, at least initially, to accommodate the price pressures with an expected transitory increase in inflation.
Return to text
8. In the September 2021 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median projection for headline inflation in 2022 was 2.2 percent. In the August 2021 Survey of Professional Forecasters (the closest survey to the September SEP), the median projection for headline inflation in 2022 was also 2.2 percent. Projections from the Blue Chip survey were similar around this time.
Return to text
9. Beginning with the data for October, readings for monthly core PCE jumped to 0.4 percent or higher and inflationary pressures broadened out across goods and services categories. And monthly job gains, already strong, were consistently revised higher over the second half of 2021. Measures of wage inflation also accelerated.
Return to text
10. For example, labor supply continued to be materially affected by COVID even after vaccines became broadly available in the U.S. By late 2021, anticipated increases in labor force participation had not yet materialized, likely owing, in part, to the rise of the Delta and Omicron COVID variants.
Return to text
11. For example, in March 2022, lockdowns were imposed in the Jilin province, the largest center for auto production. Authorities also ramped up or extended restrictions in manufacturing hubs in the southeast and in Shanghai, where lockdowns had initially been scheduled to end in April 2022.
Return to text
12. The global nature of this inflationary episode is emphasized in Cascaldi-Garcia and others (2024) and Clarida (forthcoming), among others.
Return to text
13. It has been argued that the natural rate of unemployment had risen, and that the unemployment rate was less informative about tightness in labor market than other measures such as those involving vacancies. For example, see Crump and others (2024). More generally, research has emphasized that the unemployment rate and the ratio of vacancies to unemployment often provide similar signals, but the signals differed in the pandemic period, and the ratio of vacancies to unemployment is a better overall indicator. For example, see Ball, Leigh, and Mishra (2022) and Benigno and Eggertsson (2023, 2024).
Return to text
14. For example, Ball, Leigh, and Mishra (2022) and Cecchetti and others (2023) present analyses emphasizing that disinflation would require economic slack.
Return to text
15. Blanchard and Bernanke (2023) use a traditional (flexible) Phillips curve approach to reach this conclusion for the U.S. Blanchard and Bernanke (2024) and Dao and others (forthcoming) examine a broader set of countries using similar approaches. Di Giovanni and others (2022) and Bai and others (2024) use different techniques and emphasize supply constraints and shocks in the increase in inflation over 2021 and 2022.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 15
==================================================
May 20, 2024
U.S. Economic Outlook and Housing Price Dynamics
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At the Mortgage Bankers Association’s  Secondary and Capital Markets Conference and Expo 2024  New York, New York
Share
Thank you, Mark, for the kind introduction, and good morning to all of you.
1
I am happy to be here. Today, I will do three things. First, I'll share with you my current outlook for the US economy. Second, I'll discuss my thinking on the current stance of monetary policy. Third, I'll review the dynamics of housing prices which can feed into the persistence of inflation.
My focus on housing price dynamic stems from the role housing plays in the American economy. For most families, a home is their largest-ever purchase and their most valuable asset. Capital markets professionals in real estate finance, like you, are crucial to the smooth operation of the housing sector. Families making housing decisions rely on a healthy and productive housing finance sector.
The housing sector is also one of the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy. As such, it's an important channel of monetary policy transmission. Understanding the various channels of monetary transmission is crucial to fulfillment of the dual mandate given to the Federal Reserve by the Congress: maximum employment and stable prices. This mandate guides my thinking about monetary policymaking.
With that, I'll turn to my outlook for the US economy.
Aggregate Economic Activity
The U.S. economy continues to grow at a solid pace. Adjusted for inflation, GDP was reported to have increased at a 1.6 percent annual rate in the first quarter of 2024. That was a moderation from a 3.4 percent expansion in the fourth quarter of last year. However, private domestic final purchases—which excludes inventory investment, government spending, and net exports and usually sends a clearer signal on underlying demand—grew 3.1 percent in the first quarter. That was about as strong as the second half of 2023.
Indeed, consumer spending has been robust over the past several quarters. Nevertheless, I expect spending growth to slow later this year as restrictive monetary policy weighs on demand, particularly on interest-sensitive spending.
Another reason for the strong performance of the U.S. economy over the past year is improving supply conditions as pandemic bottlenecks have unwound. I will be monitoring incoming data to understand better how much more help we will get from the supply side to bring inflation down further.
The Labor Market
The labor market remains solid. Monthly payroll gains slowed in April, with employers adding 175,000 jobs. Still, employers added an average of 242,000 jobs in the three months ended in April, and the unemployment rate remained below 4 percent last month.
The supply of workers and the demand for labor continue to come into better balance. The labor force participation rate of individuals aged 25 to 54 is now higher than before the pandemic began, as shown in
figure 1
. Employers' need for workers, as measured by job openings, declined 12 percent from a year earlier, as shown in
figure 2
. This rebalancing of the labor market has resulted in nominal wage growth easing even as unemployment remains historically low.
Inflation
Of course, I have been keeping a close eye on inflation. The good news is that inflation has eased dramatically from the peak reached almost two years ago, as shown in
figure 3
. However, inflation remains above the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent inflation objective.
Core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices, which exclude volatile food and energy costs, rose at a faster pace over the first three months of the year than they did in the latter part of 2023. The April consumer price index and producer price index data point to a more modest increase last month. Even so, Federal Reserve staff estimate that core PCE prices rose at an annual rate of 4.1 percent over the first four months of the year. That is well above the 12-month change, which we estimate at 2.75 percent. It is too early to tell whether the recent slowdown in the disinflationary process will be long lasting. The better reading for April is encouraging.
Fortunately, data on expectations suggest that the FOMC's inflation-fighting credibility remains intact. While there has been a recent uptick in Americans' inflation expectations over the next 12 months, long-term inflation expectations, over the next 10 years, remain close to pre-pandemic levels. That shows the American people believe that we will make good on our commitment to bring inflation fully back to our objective. I am acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those on fixed incomes and those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials, including housing, transportation, and food. That is why my colleagues at the Fed and I are so committed to returning inflation to our target.
Monetary Policy
So, what does the current state of the economy mean for the policy rate we set at the Fed? At the most recent meeting, three weeks ago, my colleagues and I on the FOMC decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent. I believe that our policy rate is in restrictive territory as we continue to see the labor market come into better balance, and inflation decline although nowhere near as quickly as I would have liked. The FOMC noted that it does not expect it will be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has gained greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward 2 percent. In making judgements about the appropriate stance of policy rate over time, I will be carefully assessing the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks.
At its last meeting, the FOMC also decided to continue the process of reducing our balance sheet, but at a slower pace. The cap on Treasury redemptions will be lowered from the current $60 billion per month to $25 billion per month as of June 1. Consistent with the Committee's intention to hold primarily Treasury securities in the longer run, we're leaving the cap on agency securities redemptions unchanged at $35 billion per month. We will reinvest any proceeds in excess of this cap in Treasury securities, as detailed in the May 1, 2024 operating policy statement published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
2
The Housing Market
The Fed sets policy to promote its dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability, and employment and inflation depend on conditions in the entire economy.
Still, given our gathering today, I thought it would be appropriate to dive a bit deeper into the housing and home finance markets.
As I said earlier, the housing sector is one of the most interest rate–sensitive parts of the economy. We have seen that sensitivity in mortgage rates and mortgage originations. As shown in
figure 4
, 30-year fixed-rate mortgage rates were close to 3 percent when the federal funds rate was near the zero lower bound in 2020 and 2021. Rates surged in 2022 as the federal funds rate increased. Consistent with the increase in mortgage rates, mortgage origination volume has fallen significantly.
The current restrictive stance of monetary policy has weighed on the housing market. That is helping to bring supply and demand into better balance and put downward pressure on inflation
.
One aspect of inflation that has gotten a fair amount of attention is housing and rental costs. This is because housing costs make up such a large share of household budgets. To calculate housing services inflation, government statistics don't use home prices because a home is partly an investment. Instead, housing services inflation is computed using monthly rents that capture what tenants pay to rent a house or apartment and what homeowners would, in theory, pay to rent their own home. The way this calculation is derived means changes in market rents—or what a new tenant pays to rent—take a long time to pass through to PCE housing services prices, as shown in
figure 5
. In this figure, notice that increases in market rents, the blue and red lines, peaked in 2022, and PCE housing services inflation, the black line, lagged market rents and peaked in 2023.
Lags in Housing Services Inflation
The primary reason for this lag is that market rents adjust more quickly to economic conditions than what landlords charge their existing tenants. This lag suggests that the large increase in market rents during the pandemic is still being passed through to existing rents and may keep housing services inflation elevated for a while longer. This observation is important because it is an example of one of the underlying sources of lags with which monetary policy affects inflation.
Another factor affecting pass-through of restrictive monetary policy is that fixed-rate mortgages are common in the U.S. It is often argued that this loan structure dampens the effect of monetary policy.
Figure 6
shows that the 30-year fixed mortgage rate is about 7 percent, while the average outstanding mortgage rate is about 4 percent. This lower outstanding mortgage rate is due to households who locked in rates during lower-interest periods, including when the Fed cut the target range for the federal funds rate to near zero shortly after the pandemic took hold. Fixed-rate mortgages do dampen the effect of monetary policy, but, according to recent research, not as much as previously thought.
3
There is a delay between when mortgage rates go up and when household mortgage payments go up, as shown in
figure 7
. Board staff research documents that mortgage payments go up over time because many households continue to refinance their mortgage or move. Despite higher rates, households in the U.S. borrowed over $1.5 trillion in new mortgage loans in 2023. These borrowers include first-time homebuyers, existing homeowners moving between homes, and homeowners obtaining cash-out refinances. The payment they owe on that recently obtained mortgage is higher than it would have been had lower rates been maintained, and their consumption may be correspondingly lower. The cumulative effect of a higher interest rate on aggregate mortgage payments grows over time as more new loans are originated at the higher rate. The staff's research documents that, historically, borrowers like these who are not deterred by higher rates are responsible for a little over half of the pass-through of interest rates to mortgage payments.
Conclusion
In closing, let me reiterate why we care about housing. The housing sector is where many households have made, or will make, their largest investment. Therefore, the prices that families pay for that housing can affect their overall well-being. The work you do to make housing accessible is an important part of the economy.
The housing sector is also a key part of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. That is one reason why policymakers will continue to pay close attention to this vital sector. Of course, no one sector dictates monetary policy. We look at the totality of the data to set policy and achieve the objectives given to the Fed by Congress: maximum employment and price stability. Considering the lagged effects of monetary policy, I am encouraged that over the past two years, we have made good progress toward our dual-mandate objectives.
Thank you for your time and attention today.
1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2024),
Statement Regarding Reinvestment of Principal Payments from Treasury Securities, Agency Debt, and Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities
, May 1.
Return to text
3. See, for example, Daniel Ringo (2024), "Inframarginal Borrowers and the Mortgage Payment Channel of Monetary Policy," working paper, May.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 16
==================================================
May 19, 2024
Georgetown University Law Center Commencement Address
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At Georgetown University, Washington, D.C. (via prerecorded video)
Share
Watch Live
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Thank you, Dean Treanor, for the invitation to speak here today. I am very sorry that circumstances prevent me from joining you in person.
I will start by acknowledging the parents, spouses, partners, other family members and mentors who are here. Without your support, sacrifice, and encouragement, we would not have so much to celebrate today.
And to the class of 2024—congratulations on earning your law degree. You are the most selective class in Georgetown history, chosen from 14,000 applicants, and the most well qualified as well. Among you are Fulbright scholars, military veterans, Peace Corps, AmeriCorps and Teach for America alumni, student athletes, accomplished musicians and even a medical doctor. An impressive group. This is also the most diverse class in the 154-year history of the school.
I am especially proud today to say that there is a lot of Georgetown in my family tree. My father graduated from the College in 1943 before serving in the U.S. Army in World War II. After the war, he received his law degree here and practiced law in Washington, D.C. I am fortunate to have two wonderful daughters; one graduated from the College in 2012; the other is a member of the Class of 2026 at the Law Center.
It seems like yesterday that I was in your shoes, receiving my degree, looking forward with optimism and excitement, and wondering what lay ahead.
I cannot help but think fondly of my time here. For many years, friends from law school have gathered annually for a weekend to refresh our ties and laugh about times gone by. These gatherings are referred to as "Big Chill," a reference to a 1983 movie that revolved around a mid-life reunion of college friends. I made lifelong friendships here that I keep to this day, and I hope it will be the same for you.
Along with all the hard work, I also remember the fun. A favorite tradition was to attend Saturday midnight showings of
The Rocky Horror Picture Show
at the Key Theater on Wisconsin Avenue in Georgetown.
Now, if you have led a culturally deprived life and are tragically unfamiliar with the movie, it is a raucous musical starring a young Tim Curry. Everyone in the theater would sing along, shout out the lines, and throw popcorn at the screen; many would dress up like the characters. Now, I didn't dress up—sorry to disappoint you—but no party was complete until all of us danced "The Time Warp" to the movie's famous song.
As it happens, I still remember the steps, and I had intended to demonstrate the Time Warp for you, but that will not be possible today.
Instead, I will offer a few thoughts that I might have benefited from hearing when I was sitting in your chairs a mere 45 years ago.
Embracing Change
The years since my graduation have brought waves of fundamental change to the workplace and to society at large, much of it driven by technology. Imagine a world with no internet, no email or texting, no personal computers or cell phones, no social media. Some of you parents are no doubt thinking: I would be fine with that world!
The pace of change will likely continue to be very fast. Be alert to the ways your working life may change. Think about how you can be prepared for those changes and to turn them to your advantage, and to society's advantage. The practice of law has been transformed over the years; if you do choose the path of a practicing lawyer, I would think about what practicing law could look like in 10 or 20 years.
In a world that will continue to evolve quickly and in unexpected ways, you will need to be agile. Embracing change and taking risks can be an important part of your development as a professional and as a person. Your formal education may end today, but you are not done learning. Many of the important things you will need to know can only be learned through experience. And experience can be a hard but irreplaceable teacher.
As an example, near the end of my second year here, it was time to select the next editor in chief of the
Georgetown Law Journal
. I thought that there were plenty of colleagues who were better qualified, but who simply did not want the job. So, with much trepidation, I put my name in. I was secretly, but utterly, terrified that I might be chosen. And amazingly enough, I was. What now?
It turned out that, as I feared, I was not well prepared for that responsibility. I had to keep people interested and motivated enough to work on the
Journal
when many things competed for their attention. I had to have a plan for the organization and not just for myself. I had to do this while exhibiting confidence that I did not feel. My main memory of that time is thinking, "This is harder and far different from what I had expected!"
What I now know is that almost no one is ready for their first leadership roles. When you step into a leadership role, it is very common to doubt yourself. If I could tell my younger self something, it would be to believe in yourself and put yourself in situations in which you will be seriously challenged to do new things. Assume that you will make mistakes. Learn from those mistakes; do not dwell excessively upon them in regret. You will fall down. Get up. Repeat cycle.
The more you do that, the more you will learn and the faster you will develop as a person and as a leader. Know also that, in my experience, there is no single model of a successful leader. Each of you has it in you to lead successfully.
No One Path
One of the great things about your legal education is it sets you up for success on a wide variety of potential paths. I left the practice of law a few years after I left this school. But my legal education has benefited me all along the way. Studying law teaches you to think clearly, analyze thoroughly, and understand all sides of an argument. The possibilities that lie ahead of you are extremely broad. You may work for a single law firm for your entire career. Or you may leave the law fairly soon, as I did, and never look back. You will always benefit from what you learned here.
The fact is, I do keep a copy of the Federal Reserve Act that I consult often.
Like many of you, I imagine, I knew that I wanted to do public service. As I left law school, I remember thinking about people like George Shultz and Cyrus Vance, prominent figures of the day who had successful private-sector careers and served periodically in government.
The head of the investment bank in New York where I worked as a young man was Nicholas F. Brady, who had an extraordinary career in investment banking and had served as a U.S. senator from New Jersey as well. I was the most junior of employees, but I wanted to introduce myself and tell him about my own aspirations. But approaching him was daunting. Maybe he would decline to meet with me. Maybe he would think I was not committed to the firm if I told him I was interested in public service.
I finally summoned the courage to present myself at his office. I told him that I grew up in Washington, had been a federal law clerk and a congressional staffer, and wanted to do public service along the way. I said that if you need someone to staff you on anything you do in Washington, I'm your guy. He said something along the lines of, "Great, thanks." I then crept back down the stairs to my broom closet of an office wondering whether that was going to matter.
A few months later, I got a call from his secretary. I can still hear her gravelly voice. "Can you come up and see Mr. Brady?" When I got there, he said, "I need you to help me out with this thing." This thing was defending an oil company from a hostile takeover attempt by a colorful corporate raider of that era named T. Boone Pickens. I ended up spending months going back and forth from New York to Washington with Nick. A few years later, Nick Brady became the Treasury Secretary. Nick asked me to join him at Treasury, which opened the door for me to higher levels of public service. The point is this: if I had not forced myself to get up from my desk, taken the stairs up to the 15th floor, and presented myself to his office that day, the rest of my life would have been very different, and I would not be standing here today.
Mustering that little bit of initiative changed my life. A little initiative can make all the difference in anyone's career.
Conclusion
I will conclude by encouraging you to think beyond yourselves. Each of you has the capability to achieve success in any field you choose; it is important that you also consider how to give back and use your gifts to make a difference. Reflect on the motto of this school: "law is but the means; justice is the end." Many of you have served at law clinics where you stood up for underrepresented individuals and organizations. And many of you will play important roles in the military, at nonprofits, and in governments around the world.
Each generation has an obligation to move us closer to the ideal, as embodied by the famous image of blindfolded Lady Justice holding the scales. You should count yourselves among the luckiest in all our society to graduate from this institution, to have the support of loved ones through three grueling years, and the health and other good fortune not to get tripped up along the way. Several years ago, one of my predecessors, Ben Bernanke, said, "Those who are the luckiest . . . also have the greatest responsibility to work hard, to contribute to the betterment of the world, and to share their luck with others." I cannot improve upon that.
I thank you for having me. Georgetown will always hold a special place in my heart. Thank you again to Dean Treanor and all the faculty, and the hardiest of congratulations to the Class of 2024.


Discurso 17
==================================================
May 13, 2024
Communicating about Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At “Central Bank Communications: Theory and Practice,” a conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio
Share
Watch Live
Introduction
Thank you, Ed, for the kind introduction and for the opportunity to speak.
1
You and the organizers of this conference have put together an excellent program on a very important topic, central bank communication, which is key for effective transmission of monetary policy to the economy. To fulfill our dual mandate of promoting maximum employment and price stability, it is vital that we make good monetary policy decisions and that we communicate those decisions to the public effectively.
Today, I'll do three things. First, I'll discuss the channels that the Federal Reserve currently relies on in its communications with the public. Second, I'll offer a few historical examples of how economic thinking on monetary policy communication has evolved over time. Along the way, I'll highlight how President Mester has contributed to this evolution. And, finally, I'll share some thoughts on the communication challenges that policymakers face.
Current Federal Reserve Communication Channels
Currently, Fed policymakers communicate often. The Fed publishes a statement after every Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, FOMC minutes three weeks following each meeting, a Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) four times a year, and monetary policy, financial stability, and supervision and regulation reports twice a year. The Chair holds a press conference after every FOMC meeting and testifies in front of Congress on the
Monetary Policy Report
twice a year. Other written communications from the Board and the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, as well as policymakers' speeches, interviews, and other appearances, help inform the public about the Fed's goals and its strategies to achieve those goals.
Communication isn't only about talking, it's about listening also. Listening is reflected in our activities. In addition to listening to the steady beat of economic data, the Board and the Reserve Banks conduct numerous surveys of financial market participants, businesses, and families. Some of what we hear is summarized in the Beige Book published eight times a year. And the Fed has many forms of community outreach, including
Fed Listens
events where Fed policymakers go into local communities to hear directly from people living and working there. Alternatively, sometimes representatives from communities come to us. For example, earlier this year, I heard from a rancher, a manufacturing consultant, and the head of a nursing school at one of these events.
Today, it's widely accepted that clear communication contributes greatly to the effective transmission of monetary policy, especially because clear communication can affect the expected path of interest rates and financial conditions more generally. Loretta, in one of her speeches, describes very well the role of central bank communication: "The public will have a better understanding of monetary policy when policymakers are clear about their policy goals, those aspects of the economy monetary policy can and can't influence, and the economic information that influences their forecasts and policy decisions" (Mester, 2018).
She went on to explain that when policymakers are systematic in their policy responses to changing economic conditions, the public will have a better idea of how the Committee's monetary policy is likely to change in response to anticipated and unanticipated economic developments. In particular, she noted: "With such knowledge, households and firms can plan better; they can make better saving, borrowing, investment, and employment decisions" (Mester, 2018).
The Evolution of Federal Reserve Communications
The view reflected in Loretta's words seems commonplace now, but it wasn't always so. When Loretta joined the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia in 1985, the FOMC didn't disclose its interest rate decisions. It didn't even report that it had made a decision. In 1981, Karl Brunner, the Swiss monetary economist, called central banking an esoteric art and lamented central banks' "inherent impossibility to articulate its insights in explicit and intelligible words and sentences" (Brunner, 1981). At the time, central banking wisdom dictated that monetary policymakers should say as little as possible. Some research of that vintage tried to rationalize this "secrecy" through the notion that monetary policy would be particularly effective if it surprised markets.
2
In the 1990s, central bank communication changed dramatically. In 1993, the Fed started to publish FOMC meeting minutes in their current form, and in 1994, it began releasing FOMC meeting transcripts with a five-year lag. In February 1994, the Fed started to publish post-FOMC meeting statements following meetings at which there was a change in the intended federal funds rate. In May 1999, the FOMC started to publish statements after every meeting, even on occasions when there was no change in policy. By then, the move toward greater transparency was fully embraced by Chairman Greenspan, who had once prided himself on "mumbling with great incoherence."
3
There were two primary reasons for this change. First, it was thought that greater transparency would demonstrate the Fed's accountability to the public and safeguard its political independence. Second, there was a growing appreciation in the economics profession that clarity about policy could improve macroeconomic outcomes. Expectations became a focal point in academic and policy circles with the emergence of New Keynesian models in the 1990s as a framework for monetary policy. In these models, aligning the expectations of decisionmakers in the private sector with those of policymakers produced superior economic outcomes.
4
Mike Woodford, one of the developers of the New Keynesian model, put it this way: "Not only do expectations about policy matter, but . . . very little
else
matters" (Woodford, 2005, p. 402). Communicating a policy strategy and following through on it increased the credibility of the central bank and, therefore, its ability to steer expectations and the economy. Clear communication also helped stabilize the economy and keep inflation closer to target because, when the Fed clearly articulated a reaction function, financial markets would be able to anticipate the likely future course of monetary policy and help the central bank do its work by affecting long-term rates and other asset prices.
During the tenure of Chairman Bernanke, there was another burst of innovation in the way monetary policy was communicated. In 2007, the first SEP was published to convey systematically the economic outlook of FOMC participants. In 2011, Chairman Bernanke started holding press conferences after every other FOMC meeting. In 2012, the Fed adopted an explicit inflation target of 2 percent and started publishing individual FOMC participants' views on the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate, now famously known as the "dot plot."
5
During these years, Loretta, in her capacity as the research director at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, contributed to ongoing work on communications, in collaboration with policymakers and Federal Reserve Board staff.
Of course, this was an extraordinary time for monetary policy, as interest rates in most advanced economies were close to zero following the Global Financial Crisis. The FOMC employed forward guidance—explicit communication about the future path of the policy rate—as a key tool to deal with the unprecedented situation. The research community had found that such forward guidance could be very effective in the context of the New Keynesian paradigm.
6
When Loretta became president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland in 2014, she supported the continued use of forward guidance during these extraordinary times, in particular to communicate a lower-for-longer policy that could provide accommodation in the presence of the effective lower bound constraint. She also insisted that forward guidance could be used effectively even in normal times as a means of clarifying the FOMC's reaction function.
Loretta, as a member of the FOMC subcommittee on communications, developed and advocated for several proposals to improve communications. One proposal was to publish a measure of uncertainty surrounding the SEP forecast numbers. She was concerned that uncertainty could be underestimated by the public if it wasn't communicated. The proposal was adopted, and "fan" charts showing uncertainty associated with the median projections have been a feature of the SEP materials since 2017. Progress toward greater transparency and more effective communication has since continued. For example, since 2019 Chair Powell has been holding a press conference after every FOMC meeting.
Researchers at academic and policy institutions have made advances in recent years in measuring the effectiveness of central bank communication. For example, several researchers are now using natural language processing techniques to analyze the impact of central bank communications—including statements, press conferences, speeches, and minutes—on asset prices and economic outcomes.
7
Another development is the identification of the effect that Federal Reserve policy communications may have on asset prices using high-frequency financial market data. This empirical strategy has allowed researchers to establish new facts. For example, some economists have found that policymaker speeches affect asset prices as much as the information released via FOMC statements and press conferences, and the effects that central bank communications have on asset prices can differ, depending on whether the communication conveys news about the policy rate path or about the economic outlook.
8
Communication Challenges Facing Policymakers
As my brief retelling indicates, we have come a long way. Over the past 30 years, the Fed and many other central banks have embraced transparency and deliberately used their communications as a policy tool. And researchers keep developing better methods to measure and evaluate our communications.
At this point, you may be wondering how much longer I am going to talk. And that question leads me to the following one, which is salient for my topic today: Are there limits to the benefits of communication?
Surely, sometimes central bank communications can have unintended consequences. Let me give you two examples. First, there is always a risk that policymakers' statements about their economic outlook or their expected future path of the policy rate are interpreted by the public with a false sense of certainty. For example, a data-dependent forward-guidance announcement can be mistaken for a commitment to a fixed path of interest rates. When that interpretation is proven wrong down the road, it can create more volatility and uncertainty than if there had been no announcement. That is why policymakers always make sure to stress the data dependence of future policy decisions. Second, it's also possible that the public misinterprets the views of individual policymakers as a Committee view. The potential for misinterpretation is especially acute when many policymakers speak at the same time and disagree with each other.
9
The diversity of viewpoints among policymakers lends itself to stimulating debates and, ultimately, better policy. But in such a situation, more communication could increase rather than reduce uncertainty about our policies.
I think we stand to benefit a lot from more research in this area. Important questions include, how does the diversity of views among policymakers affect the effectiveness of communications? And, more generally, what distinguishes effective from ineffective central bank communication?
Conclusion
Let me conclude by repeating what I said at the beginning: To fulfill our dual mandate of promoting maximum employment and price stability, we need to formulate good policies and to make sure that our policies are clearly understood. Doing so helps make monetary policy more effective. Therefore, I encourage researchers to continue to address important questions related to central bank communication. Finally, I congratulate President Mester on her outstanding career in the Federal Reserve System and wish her the best of luck in her new adventures.
Thank you.
References
Acosta, Miguel (2023). "A New Measure of Central Bank Transparency and Implications for the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy,"
International Journal of Central Banking
, vol. 19 (August), pp. 49–97.
Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2006). "Optimal Monetary Policy under Commitment with a Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 38 (October), pp. 1877–905.
Brunner, Karl (1981). "The Art of Central Banking," Center for Research in Government Policy and Business, University of Rochester, Working Paper GPB 81-6.
Cukierman, Alex, and Allan H. Meltzer (1986). "A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility, and Inflation under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,"
Econometrica,
vol. 54 (September), pp. 1099–128.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "
The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
no. 1, pp. 139–211.
Ehrmann, Michael, and Alena Wabitsch (2022). "Central Bank Communication with Non-Experts—A Road to Nowhere?"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 127 (April), pp. 69–85.
Gardner, Ben, Chiara Scotti, and Clara Vega (2022). "Words Speak as Loudly as Actions: Central Bank Communication and the Response of Equity Prices to Macroeconomic Announcements,"
Journal of Econometrics,
vol. 231 (December), pp. 387–409.
Goodfriend, Marvin (1986). "Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 17 (January), pp. 63–92.
Jarociński, Marek, and Peter Karadi (2020). "Deconstructing Monetary Policy Surprises—The Role of Information Shocks,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
, vol. 12 (April), pp. 1–43.
Lindsey, David E. (2003). "
A Modern History of FOMC Communication: 1975–2002 (PDF)
," Memorandum, Board of Governors Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs.
Mester, Loretta J. (2018). "
The Federal Reserve and Monetary Policy Communications
," speech delivered at the Tangri Lecture at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, January 17.
Orphanides, Athanasios, and John Williams (2005). "Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation Expectations, and Monetary Policy," in Ben Bernanke and Michael Woodford, eds.,
The Inflation-Targeting Debate.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 201–46.
Swanson, Eric T. (2023). "The Importance of Fed Chair Speeches as a Monetary Policy Tool,"
AEA Papers and Proceedings
, vol. 113 (May), pp. 394–400.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette (2019). "Central Banking with Many Voices: The Communications Arms Race," paper presented at the 23rd Annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile.
Woodford, Michael (2005). "
Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness (PDF)
," in
The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future,
proceedings of a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., Aug. 25–27. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 399–474.
1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. See, for example, Goodfriend (1986) and Cukierman and Meltzer (1986).
Return to text
3. Lindsey (2003) provides an extensive account of the history of FOMC communications from 1975 to 2002.
Return to text
4. See Orphanides and Williams (2005), among many others.
Return to text
5. The document containing the 2 percent inflation target, named the "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy," also clarified that the Committee would not set a quantitative target for maximum employment and stated that the Committee would follow a "balanced approach" in promoting both sides of the dual mandate.
Return to text
6. Notable early studies include Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Adam and Billi (2006).
Return to text
7. Some recent contributions include Acosta (2023), Gardner and others (2022), and Ehrmann and Wabitsch (2022).
Return to text
8. See Swanson (2023) and Jarocinski and Karadi (2020).
Return to text
9. This "cacophony problem" could be severe if policymakers actively tried to sway market expectations to align with their personal views (Vissing-Jorgensen, 2019).
Return to text


Discurso 18
==================================================
April 16, 2024
Economic Uncertainty and the Evolution of Monetary Policymaking
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C.
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Matteo. It is my pleasure to welcome you to the 13th International Research Forum on Monetary Policy. The vibrant discussions you will engage in at this conference, and your research more broadly, will help us to understand better the origins and implications of uncertainty. I became a member of the Federal Reserve Board just as it was grappling with the economic after-effects of the pandemic, a once-in-a-century disturbance of worldwide significance. As a result, I know from firsthand experience that understanding the main sources of uncertainty and how best to make monetary policy decisions in the presence of uncertainty are crucial to policymaking.
I will take this opportunity to do a couple of things. First, I will review a few historical examples of how economic thinking on monetary policymaking in the presence of uncertainty has evolved. Second, I will consider lessons learned from these examples that could influence how monetary policymakers think about the policy choices the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) faces currently.
1
The 1960s to the 1980s
In the 1960s, during the heyday of Keynesian macroeconomics, researchers widely believed that monetary policymakers faced a long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, and that the tradeoff could be calibrated to keep unemployment indefinitely low at an acceptable cost in terms of higher inflation. Improvements in econometric modeling abounded, and the harnessing of
optimal-control
methods developed in the field of engineering held out the prospect that business cycle fluctuations could be stabilized.
There were contrarians, of course, most notably Milton Friedman, who highlighted the necessity of monetary policymakers to consider what they
don't
know in their decisionmaking process (Friedman, 1968). Friedman's statement that monetary policy works with "long and variable lags" was, among other things, an argument against policymakers trying to fine-tune the level of economic activity. In recognition of policymakers' limited knowledge of short-run economic relationships, Friedman advocated the use of simple rules for monetary policy, such as the
k
-percent money growth rule. He argued that rules that focused on monetary growth and that eschewed direct feedback on macroeconomic variables would work reasonably well, on average, and avoid the hubris of fine-tuning policy in a dynamic and uncertain world.
History proved Friedman right in his take on the importance of uncertainty, even if his prescription of a
k
-percent money growth rule fared less well.
During roughly the same period when Friedman authored his famous presidential address to the American Economic Association disputing the purported long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, William Brainard published an influential paper on the implications of uncertainty. Brainard (1967) argued that uncertainty about the power of monetary policy implied that policy should respond more cautiously to shocks than would be the case if this uncertainty did not exist. Brainard's
attenuation principle
is a classic example of what is today known as the Bayesian approach to uncertainty.
2
The Brainard approach to uncertainty consisted of two steps. The first step is to compute the optimal policy for a world without uncertainty; that is, the
certainty equivalence
case. The second step is to adjust that policy response to account for the particular uncertainty under study. One strand of research followed these steps through the 1970s and beyond.
3
A parallel strand of research that embraced at least part of the message of Friedman was also under way. It bypassed the optimal policy benchmark altogether, on the grounds that uncertainty is pervasive, and sought instead to find simple rules that performed well across a large class of models and for a large range of conditions.
Brainard's insight was important. There are many circumstances in which the principle of gradualism applies, but as I will discuss later, economic research has also found that there are circumstances in which the presence of uncertainty does not warrant a gradual policy response.
The 1990s and 2000s
Jumping ahead to the 1990s, a "new economy" was emerging. The unemployment rate was below what many analysts at the time judged to be its natural rate, and many FOMC participants and others were forecasting growth above the economy's potential. Chairman Alan Greenspan, however, suspected that technological advances and other forces were fostering a "new economy" of sustained high productivity growth that would allow a period of persistently low unemployment without generating inflationary pressure. In the absence of hard evidence to the contrary, he was able to persuade the FOMC to go along with him by implicitly employing the Bayesian logic of Brainard's attenuation principle with a disarmingly simple suggestion: Let's just wait one more meeting and see. Chairman Greenspan repeated this message as inflation fell from above 2 percent in 1996 to below 2 percent in 1997 and 1998 while the economy added 9.3 million jobs, and the FOMC raised the federal funds rate just once.
4
Around the same time, there was an explosion of interest in
simple policy rules
for monetary policy, beginning, in most people's reckoning, with the rule John Taylor (1993) published in the early 1990s. These simple feedback rules, which specify how central banks' policy instrument would respond to the state of the economy, differed from their predecessors by replacing monetary aggregates as the instrument of monetary policy with a short-term policy interest rate. This research embraced the message that restricting feedback to a small number of key macroeconomic variables would result in more robust outcomes than adhering to the prescriptions of, say, optimal-control policies, which in essence imposed feedback on all aspects of these models.
5
Whether much of the robustness gains of simple rules can be realized when central banks only use such rules as "guides" for monetary policy is a topic worthy of further research.
6
The claimed robustness of simple rules across a set of fixed models is arguably only part of their appeal. Another part is the notion that their parsimony presumably makes simple rules relatively easy for households, businesses, and financial market participants to learn. One useful finding was that gradualism in policy setting, in the form of a sizable weight on the lagged policy rate in the policy rule, is helpful for facilitating learnability.
7
In any event, the literature on learning in macroeconomics extended the dimension of uncertainty for monetary policymakers from the cross section of candidate models to the time dimension of any given model.
The bulk of the early literature assumed private-sector decisionmakers were knowledgeable, rational agents, while policymakers lacked detailed knowledge of the structure of the economy. The assumed imbalance of information and knowledge was striking. It was usually assumed, sometimes only implicitly, that private agents understood not only the economic environment in which they operated, but also the policy regime that was in place. Considering this background, some more recent contributions explored two related departures from the assumption of a fixed model with uncertain parameters: time-variation in the true (population) model, and private agents learning about the economy.
As I just observed, the rational expectations paradigm presupposes that economic agents have a great deal of knowledge about their environment, but policymakers do not know the true (population) parameters of the models they use. Instead, they must use estimates of those parameters. As Sargent (1993) noted, it makes sense to assume that the decisionmakers within the models that policymakers employ are no more sophisticated than the econometricians who estimate them. Doing so means accepting that the true (population) parameters of one's model could be time varying—the outcome of the interplay between shocks, uncertainty, learning, and policy. That realization changes the way you think about monetary policy.
How might this matter? Let me give you one example. As many of you know, econometricians have found sizable declines in recent decades in the response of inflation to the unemployment rate.
8
Taken at face value, these declines in the slope of the Phillips curve have important implications for the optimal conduct of monetary policy. But what should policymakers take from such econometric results? Some researchers argue that the apparent decline in the response to slack in the Phillips curve could be a manifestation of the improved control of inflation by the central bank.
9
That is, policymakers could be "victims of their own success" in the sense that good performance in controlling inflation over the Great Moderation period may have weakened the information content of the data.
Now, take this notion a step further, as a strand of the literature does, and suppose that private agents within our models are themselves skeptical—that is, that they have doubts about their methods for formulating expectations and making decisions, and that they act accordingly. Economists now have new means of modeling uncertainty both
within
a given model and
across
a set of rival models. These methods draw on theories of
ambiguity aversion
.
10
Under ambiguity aversion, agents are particularly concerned about types of uncertainties that do not lend themselves to being represented in terms of probabilities. Agents' choices are motivated, in part, by an incentive to minimize the adverse consequences of these types of uncertainties. The ambiguity aversion approach to uncertainty suggests that to protect against uncertainty over which a policymaker is unwilling or unable to attach prior probabilities, the appropriate response is often anti-attenuation; that is, policy should apply
stronger
monetary medicine than in the certainty equivalence case.
For the reasons I have outlined, there are circumstances when uncertainty might appropriately induce a gradual response and other circumstances when a nongradual response to uncertainty may be justified. Furthermore, under either the Bayesian approach or the ambiguity aversion approach, the best response to uncertainty is context specific and can vary over time.
11
Sometimes the context leads to the same conclusion, broadly speaking, regardless of the approach. One case of perennial interest to central bankers is inflation persistence where the Bayesian approach, the ambiguity aversion approach, and its close cousin, robust control, all tend to lead to policy that is stronger than the certainty equivalent case to forestall the possibility of inflationary forces becoming embedded in inflation expectations.
12
Another case is that of crisis periods.
The Global Financial Crisis
Take, for example, the Global Financial Crisis of 2008. During this period, the tension between caution, on the one hand, and vigorous action, on the other, as a way to conduct monetary policy in the face of uncertainty was evident. In September 2007, the FOMC decided to lower its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to "forestall some of the adverse effects on the broader economy that might otherwise arise from the disruptions in financial markets" and noted that "developments in financial markets since the Committee's last regular meeting have increased the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook."
13
In subsequent meetings, the FOMC gradually lowered its target for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points and, in January 2008, decided to quicken its pace by lowering the target by 75 basis points in an unscheduled meeting and by 50 basis points, 75 basis points, and 25 basis points in subsequent meetings. Inflation, however, was rising over that period. By June 2008, it was well over 2 percent and still increasing, and the FOMC paused its rate cutting. It was a decision that weighed the upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations with the downside risks to economic growth.
14
In September 2008, the circumstances changed precipitously, as did the FOMC's approach to policy. The Committee quickly cut the federal funds rate effectively to zero and took extraordinary steps to stabilize the financial system and support the economy. The motivation to respond assertively to the emerging crisis, and the uncertainty surrounding it, was no doubt accentuated by the knowledge that future policy actions might be circumscribed by a lengthy spell of the funds rate at its lower bound, which would magnify losses associated with adverse outcomes.
15
My conclusion, as Chair Powell mentioned in a speech in 2018, is that during crisis periods, words like "we will do whatever it takes" will likely be more effective than "we will take cautious steps."
16
Lessons Learned
Some clear lessons flow from the history that I have summarized. First, when uncertainty is high, policymakers should sometimes act quickly and should sometimes act cautiously. The right action depends on the circumstances. Second, while simple monetary policy rules are appealing for several reasons, rigid adherence to the prescriptions of simple rules is unwarranted. Historically, policymakers have only used rules as "guides" or benchmarks in setting policy, and there are good reasons for this. It is clearly beneficial to look at the totality of the data to identify changes in the economy in real time, to embrace the risk-management considerations associated with uncertainty that factor into FOMC decisions, and to adapt policy to the evolution of the economy. Third, in the presence of a high degree of uncertainly, policymakers benefit from a healthy dose of humility. There are limits to what we know about the economy, especially after periods of economic upheaval such as a pandemic.
Current Situation
Reflecting on the situation we are facing today, over the past year, inflation has come down significantly but is still running above the FOMC's 2 percent goal. In March, headline personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation was 2.7 percent over the past 12 months based on the Federal Reserve's staff estimates. A year earlier, it was 4.4 percent. Core PCE inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy components, stood at 2.8 percent; a year ago, it was 4.8 percent. While we have seen considerable progress in lowering inflation, the job of sustainably restoring 2 percent inflation is not yet done.
Real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2023 was 3.4 percent, and I expect first-quarter economic growth to slow down but remain solid as indicated by the solid growth in retail sales in March and February. Recent readings on both job gains and inflation have come in higher than expected. The economy added an average of 276,000 nonfarm jobs per month in the three months through March, a faster pace than we have seen since last March. And the inflation data over the past three months were above the low readings in the second half of last year.
My baseline outlook continues to be that inflation will decline further, with the policy rate held steady at its current level, and that the labor market will remain strong, with labor demand and supply continuing to rebalance. Of course, the outlook is still quite uncertain, and if incoming data suggest that inflation is more persistent than I currently expect it to be, it will be appropriate to hold in place the current restrictive stance of policy for longer. I am fully committed to getting inflation back to 2 percent.
Conclusion
I would like to conclude by saying that in this environment of heightened uncertainty, it is increasingly important to comprehend what is driving uncertainty and how monetary policy might play a role in limiting the negative impact of uncertainty on businesses, households, and financial markets. Many of you in this audience have devoted a considerable amount of time to understanding the intricate link between uncertainty and economic outcomes. Your work has enriched our collective knowledge and has been instrumental in helping us policymakers understand the complexities of our decisions. Please keep it up!
Thank you.
References
Adam, Klaus, and Michael Woodford (2012). "Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy in a Microfounded New Keynesian Model,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 59 (July), pp. 468–87.
Barlevy, Gadi (2011). "Robustness and Macroeconomic Policy,"
Annual Review of Economics,
vol. 3 (September), pp. 1–24.
Blinder, Alan S. (1998).
Central Banking in Theory and Practice.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Brainard, William C. (1967). "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 57 (May), pp. 411–25.
Bullard, James (2018). "
The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF)
," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19.
Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra (2002). "Learning about Monetary Policy Rules,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 49 (September), pp. 1105–29.
Chow, Gregory (1976). "The Control of Nonlinear Econometric Systems with Unknown Parameters,"
Econometrica,
vol. 44 (July), pp. 685–95.
Craine, Roger, and Arthur Havenner (1977). "A Stochastic Optimal Control Technique for Models with Estimated Coefficients,"
Econometrica,
vol. 45 (May), pp. 1013–21.
Epstein, Larry G., and Martin Schneider (2003). "Recursive Multiple Priors,"
Journal of Economic Theory,
vol. 113 (November), pp. 1–31.
Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja (2001).
Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 58 (March), pp. 1–17.
Hansen, Lars P., and Thomas J. Sargent (2008).
Robustness.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
——— (2021). "Macroeconomic Uncertainty Prices When Beliefs Are Tenuous,"
Journal of Econometrics,
vol. 223 (July), pp. 222–50.
Kendrick, David (1982). "Caution and Probing in a Macroeconomic Model,"
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
vol. 4 (November), pp. 149–70.
Knight, Frank H. (1921).
Risk, Uncertainty and Profit.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
McLeay, Michael, and Silvana Tenreyro (2019). "Optimal Inflation and the Identification of the Phillips Curve," in Martin S. Eichenbaum, Erik Hurst, and Jonathan A. Parker, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2019,
vol. 34. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 199–255.
Nikolsko-Rzhevskyy, Alex, David H. Papell, and Ruxandra Prodan (2014). "Deviations from Rules-Based Policy and Their Effects,"
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
vol. 49 (December), pp. 4–17.
Powell
,
Jerome H. (
2018
). "
Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy
," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24.
Prescott, Edward (1972). "The Multi-Period Control Problem under Uncertainty,"
Econometrica,
vol. 40 (November), pp. 1043–58.
Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66.
Taylor, John B. (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214.
Taylor, John B., and John C. Williams (2010). "Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,
Handbook of Monetary Economics,
vol. 3B. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 829–59.
Sargent, Thomas J. (1993).
Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics: The Arne Ryde Memorial Lectures.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, Simon C., Allan Timmermann, and Jonathan Wright (2023). "
Breaks in the Phillips Curve: Evidence from Panel Data
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2023-015. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
Söderstrom, Ulf (2002). "Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters,"
Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
vol. 104 (March), pp. 125–45.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2021). "Slack and Cyclically Sensitive Inflation,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 52 (December), pp. 393–428.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003). "What Is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in Monetary Policy through Targeting Rules,"
Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 41 (June), pp. 426–77.
Tetlow, Robert (2019). "The Monetary Policy Response to Uncertain Inflation Persistence,"
Economics Letters,
vol. 175 (February), pp. 5–8.
Tetlow, Robert, and Peter von zur Muehlen (2001). "Robust Monetary Policy with Misspecified Models: Does Model Uncertainty Always Call for Attenuated Policy?"
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
vol. 25 (June), pp. 911–49.
——— (2009). "Robustifying Learnability,"
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
vol. 33 (February), pp. 296–316.
Whittle, Peter (1981). "Risk-Sensitive Linear/Quadratic/Gaussian Control,"
Advances in Applied Probability,
vol. 13 (December), pp. 764–77
.
Yellen, Janet L. (2012). "
Perspectives on Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the Boston Economic Club Dinner, Boston, June 6.
1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. For example, in 1998, Alan Blinder wrote that the Brainard result was "never far from my mind when I occupied the Vice Chairman's office at the Federal Reserve. In my view . . . a little stodginess at the central bank is entirely appropriate" (Blinder, 1998, p. 12).
Return to text
3. An incomplete list of the early contributions includes Prescott (1972), Chow (1976), Craine and Havenner (1977), and Kendrick (1982).
Return to text
4. The estimate of 9.3 million jobs uses total nonfarm seasonally adjusted numbers from the
St. Louis Fed FRED database
(PAYEMS series) and takes the difference between the December 1998 and January 1996 numbers.
Return to text
5. Optimal-control policies are optimal conditional on the structure of the model to which they are applied. Provided the model is a reliable approximation of the true economy, and policymakers' preferences are correctly specified, the policy prescriptions derived from optimal-control exercises are, by definition, the best that can be achieved. However, the underlying assumptions are stringent in many applications. There is also a literature on risk-adjusted optimal control dating back at least to Whittle (1981). See Taylor and Williams (2010) and references therein for a detailed argument on the efficacy of simple rules as hedges against model misspecification. Svensson (2003) is a critique of the use of all simple monetary policy rules—sometimes referred to as
instrument rules
—as opposed to what are called
targeting rules
. In a 2012 speech, then Vice Chair Janet Yellen observed, "In evaluating the stance of policy, I find the prescriptions from simple policy rules a logical starting point" (Yellen, 2012). She went on to argue that simple rules "by no means deserve the 'last word'" on guidance for monetary policy, in part because they do not fully account for factors that might be idiosyncratic, such as risk-management concerns. That speech introduced the Fed's optimal-control simulations to the public as an alternative source of guidance for monetary policy that could be used alongside that of simple monetary policy rules, together with judgment. Since 2017, the
Monetary Policy Report
has discussed simple monetary policy rules and their limitations.
Return to text
6. Nikolosko-Rzhevskyy, Papell, and Prodan (2014), among others, explore this question.
Return to text
7. By "learnable" I mean in the sense that least-squares learning would converge, in the limit, on rational expectations equilibrium. See Evans and Honkapohja (2001) for a textbook treatment of learning in macroeconomics. Bullard and Mitra (2002) established the benefits of inertia in monetary policy for making a wider set of models "E-stable," meaning the process of least-squares learning leads to a unique and stable equilibrium. Tetlow and von zur Muehlen (2009) broadened that conclusion to a wider set of learning rules.
Return to text
8. See, for example, Stock and Watson (2021) for time-series evidence and Smith, Timmermann, and Wright (2023) for panel data results.
Return to text
9. See, for example, Bullard (2018) for a demonstration and McLeay and Tenreyo (2019) for a detailed argument along these lines.
Return to text
10. The literature on robust control in economics (for example, Hansen and Sargent, 2008) began with the normative case of how policymakers might address their doubts. The literature on ambiguity aversion (for example, Epstein and Schneider, 2003) had agents within models confront their doubts in making decisions. Works at the intersection of these two strands of the literature expand the concept of uncertainty (in the sense of Knight, 1921) in a micro-founded manner and relax the rational expectations hypothesis in a disciplined way. See, for example, Hansen and Sargent (2021).
Return to text
11. See Barlevy (2011) for an accessible survey and Tetlow and von zur Muehlen (2001) for a more technical treatment.
Return to text
12. Söderstöm (2002) establishes the result for the Bayesian case. Tetlow (2019) is a simple demonstration of that case alongside an ambiguity aversion case. With uncertain inflation persistence, the Bayesian and ambiguity aversion approaches lead to a policy that is stronger than the certainty equivalent case because a symmetric distribution for inflation persistence results in asymmetric (downward-skewed) distributions for economic outcomes when evaluated for the certainty equivalent policy. Adam and Woodford (2012) show that uncertainty regarding the data generating process for inflation in the New Keynesian model retains as the optimal policy the same general form as in the standard model but with a more aggressive response to inflation.
Return to text
13. See paragraphs 2 and 4 of the September 2007 FOMC statement, which is available on the Federal Reserve Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
14. See paragraph 4 of the June 2008 FOMC statement, which, in explaining the FOMC's decision to keep its target for the federal funds rate at 2 percent at that meeting, noted, "Although downside risks to growth remain, they appear to have diminished somewhat, and the upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations have increased." See also the minutes of the June 24–25, 2008, FOMC Meeting, in particular the summary of the Committee's discussion on downside risks to growth and upside risks to inflation on pages 7 and 8. Both documents are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
15. The literature on the implications of the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates for the conduct on monetary policy is large and includes Reifschneider and Williams (2000).
Return to text
16. See Powell (2018).
Return to text


Discurso 19
==================================================
April 03, 2024
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Stanford Business, Government, and Society Forum, Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California
Share
Watch Live
It is a pleasure to be here today. I will begin with the economy and the road ahead for monetary policy before briefly discussing the Federal Reserve's monetary policy independence.
Over the past year, inflation has come down significantly but is still running above the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent goal. In February, headline inflation was 2.5 percent over the past 12 months based on the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) index. A year earlier, it was 5.2 percent. Core inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy components, stood at 2.8 percent; a year ago, it was 4.8 percent. While this progress is welcome, the job of sustainably restoring 2 percent inflation is not yet done.
Tight monetary policy continues to weigh on demand, particularly in interest-sensitive spending categories.
Nonetheless, growth in economic activity and employment was strong in 2023, as real gross domestic product expanded more than 3 percent and 3 million jobs were created, even as inflation fell substantially. This combination of outcomes reflects significant improvements in supply that offset to some extent the effects on demand of tighter financial conditions. The healing of global supply chains helped address pent-up demand for goods, particularly in sectors that had faced considerable shortages, such as autos. In addition, labor supply increased significantly, thanks to rising participation among 25-to-54-year-olds, as well as a strong pace of immigration.
Recent readings on both job gains and inflation have come in higher than expected. The economy added an average of 265,000 jobs per month in the three months through February, a faster pace than we have seen since last June. And the higher inflation data over January and February were above the low readings in the second half of last year.
The recent data do not, however, materially change the overall picture, which continues to be one of solid growth, a strong but rebalancing labor market, and inflation moving down toward 2 percent on a sometimes bumpy path. Labor market rebalancing is evident in data on quits, job openings, surveys of employers and workers, and the continued gradual decline in wage growth. On inflation, it is too soon to say whether the recent readings represent more than just a bump. We do not expect that it will be appropriate to lower our policy rate until we have greater confidence that inflation is moving sustainably down toward 2 percent. Given the strength of the economy and progress on inflation so far, we have time to let the incoming data guide our decisions on policy.
We have held our policy rate at its current level since last July. As shown in the individual projections the FOMC released two weeks ago, my colleagues and I continue to believe that the policy rate is likely at its peak for this tightening cycle. If the economy evolves broadly as we expect, most FOMC participants see it as likely to be appropriate to begin lowering the policy rate at some point this year.
Of course, the outlook is still quite uncertain, and we face risks on both sides. Reducing rates too soon or too much could result in a reversal of the progress we have seen on inflation and ultimately require even tighter policy to get inflation back to 2 percent. But easing policy too late or too little could unduly weaken economic activity and employment. As progress on inflation continues and labor market tightness eases, these risks continue to move into better balance.
As conditions evolve, monetary policy is well positioned to confront either of these risks. We are making decisions meeting by meeting, and we will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
That brings me to my second topic. The Fed has been assigned two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices. Our success in delivering on these goals matters a great deal to all Americans. To support our pursuit of those goals, Congress granted the Fed a substantial degree of independence in our conduct of monetary policy. Fed policymakers serve long terms that are not synchronized with election cycles. Our decisions are not subject to reversal by other parts of the government, other than through legislation. This independence both enables and requires us to make our monetary policy decisions without consideration of short-term political matters. Such independence for a federal agency is and should be rare. In the case of the Fed, independence is essential to our ability to serve the public. The record shows that independent central banks deliver better economic outcomes.
1
We recognize that we need to continually earn this grant of independence, and we do so by carrying out our work with technical competence and objectivity, in a transparent and accountable manner, and by sticking to our knitting.
By technical competence, I mean that Fed policymakers use the most up-to-date information and research to deepen our understanding of the ever-evolving economy and to reliably deliver on our assigned goals. We are supported by a highly capable staff. We also draw on the insights and experiences of a wide array of business, academic, community, and labor leaders, as well as others engaged in the economy. And by objective, I mean that our analysis is free from any personal or political bias, in service to the public. We will not always get it right—no one does. But our decisions will always reflect our painstaking assessment of what is best for our economy in the medium and longer term—and nothing else.
Transparency and accountability are fundamental for any government agency in a democracy but are especially important for one granted policy independence. The Fed has a special obligation to explain ourselves clearly—to describe what we are doing and why we are doing it. We are always striving to improve on this communication, and it is a job that is never complete. But we have come a long way. Before 1994, the FOMC did not even announce our monetary policy decisions. Today we announce those decisions and explain the thinking behind them in our post meeting statement and press conference. We publish detailed minutes of our deliberations and a quarterly summary of the economic and policy projections of each FOMC participant. We publish a monetary policy report twice a year, and the Chair appears before Congress to present that report and answer any and all questions that are on the minds of our oversight committee members. In 2020, we completed a yearlong public review of our monetary policy framework, and late this year, we will begin another such review.
2
My colleagues and I explain our views on the economic outlook and monetary policy in speeches like this one, and in visits to communities across the country, as part of extensive outreach in which we seek input from individuals and groups throughout society. Transparency is an affirmative and proactive commitment to the public.
To maintain the public's trust, we also need to avoid "mission creep." Our nation faces many challenges, some of which directly or indirectly involve the economy. Fed policymakers are often pressed to take a position on issues that are arguably relevant to the economy but are not within our mandate, such as particular tax and spending policies, immigration policy, and trade policy. Climate change is another current example. Policies to address climate change are the business of elected officials and those agencies that they have charged with this responsibility. The Fed has received no such charge. We do, however, have a narrow role that relates to our responsibilities as a bank supervisor. The public will expect that the institutions we regulate and supervise will understand and be able to manage the material risks that they face, which, over time, are likely to include climate-related financial risks. We will remain alert to the risk that there will be pressure to expand that role over time. We are not, nor do we seek to be, climate policymakers.
In short, doing our job well requires that we respect the limits of our mandate.
Thank you. I look forward to our discussion.
1. See, for example, Alberto Alesina and Lawrence H. Summers (1993), "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 25 (May), pp. 151–62; Christopher Crowe and Ellen E. Meade (2007), "The Evolution of Central Bank Governance around the World,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 21 (Fall), pp. 69–90; Christopher Crowe and Ellen E. Meade (2008), "Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness,"
European Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 24 (December), pp. 763–77; and N. Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen (2014), "Central Bank Transparency and Independence: Updates and New Measures,"
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 10 (March), pp. 189–253.
Return to text
2. We expect to release the results of this review about a year after it begins.
Return to text


Discurso 20
==================================================
February 22, 2024
Is This Time Different? Recent Monetary Policy Cycles in Retrospect
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Adam, and thank you to Peterson for the opportunity to speak to you today.
Before I begin, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.
I will take this opportunity to share with you my outlook on the U.S. economy and some upside and downside risks to which I am paying special attention. Also, I will review past monetary policy cycles and discuss what lessons we may learn from them. With that, let me turn to my outlook for the U.S. economy.
Aggregate Economic Activity
Growth in real gross domestic product in 2023 came in much higher than expected by most professional forecasters, buoyed by strength in consumer spending. Toward the end of 2023, however, household balance sheets began to weaken, as indicated by higher delinquency rates and a further decline in savings. These developments lead me to expect slower growth in spending and output in 2024. Even so, without a clear understanding of why consumer spending has been so resilient, I see continuing strength in spending as an important upside risk to my forecast. One possible explanation is that consumers do not want to give up previous levels of consumption, perhaps because of habit formation as described by Robert Pollak (1970) and an optimistic view of future income prospects. Another possibility is the one raised in pioneering work by James Duesenberry (1949) 75 years ago and later developed in the context of modern macroeconomics by Jordi Gali (1994). Socially motivated consumption—or "keeping up with the Joneses"—could cause individuals to consume more than what is predicted by models that only consider household wealth and income.
1
2
The Labor Market
The imbalance between labor demand and labor supply has narrowed, as labor demand has cooled while labor supply has improved. There is evidence of cooling labor demand, such as the decline in job openings by 3 million from their peak in March 2022. Nevertheless, the labor market remains tight and job openings remain about 20 percent above their pre-pandemic level, as shown in
figure 1
. At the same time, layoffs have remained very low, and the pace of payroll employment gains remains strong, with nonfarm payroll monthly job gains in the past three months averaging 289,000. The unemployment rate in January was 3.7 percent, a level that is still near historical lows. The fact that the unemployment rate and layoffs have remained low in the U.S. economy over the past year amid disinflation suggests that there is a path to restoring price stability without the kind of substantial increase in unemployment that has often accompanied significant tightening cycles.
The Inflation Outlook
Inflation made clear progress over 2023 toward the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent inflation objective. I believe that this progress reflects both the unwinding of pandemic-related supply and demand distortions in the economy as well as restrictive monetary policy, which has cooled strong demand and given the supply side of the economy time to catch up. As shown in
figure 2
, over the 12 months ended in January, the Federal Reserve's staff estimates that total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices rose 2.4 percent, down from 5.5 percent over the preceding 12 months. Core PCE prices, which excludes energy and food prices, rose 2.8 percent, down from 4.9 percent. The figures for January are estimates that incorporate the somewhat larger consumer price index (CPI) increase we saw last month. That disappointing CPI reading highlights that the disinflation process is likely to be bumpy. The January data notwithstanding, the slowing in core inflation has been especially pronounced in recent months, as the 3- and 6-month changes in core PCE prices through January, at 2.5 percent and 2.4 percent, respectively, clearly remain below the 12-month change shown in figure 2. The most striking moderation has been in core goods prices, as shown in
figure 3
, which have declined outright over the past year. Inflation in core services, both in its housing component and nonhousing services, has also slowed, but not as much. I believe that as the labor market continues to cool, core services price increases will continue to moderate. Of course, I remain attentive to other possibilities.
A Longer-Term Perspective on Monetary Policy Cycles
Next, I would like to highlight key aspects of past monetary policy cycles and what lessons we may learn from these past experiences. For exposition purposes, my review focuses on easing cycles and their preceding peak-rate episodes that extend back to 1989; however, I also will make some comments on an important episode prior to 1989.
1
As of our last meeting in January, my colleagues on the FOMC and I believe that our policy rate is likely at its peak for this tightening cycle and that, if the economy evolves broadly as expected, it will likely be appropriate to begin dialing back policy restraint at some point this year. I will therefore start with a description of economic conditions during past peak-rate episodes, given where we are today.
The first column of
table 1
lists the dates of the latest six peak-rate episodes preceding easing cycles, defined as a sequence of rate cuts without rate hikes in between. The second and third columns summarize economic conditions as described in official accounts of monetary policy released at the time, such as FOMC statements, minutes of Committee meetings, and the Federal Reserve Board's semiannual
Monetary Policy Report
. The table also records inflation at the time of the peak rate as measured by the 12-month percent change in headline and core PCE price indexes.
2
My main inference is that most of the time, in five out of the six episodes, the peak rate is reached once inflation is contained, albeit in some cases with risks still present. There is only one exception in this sample, the March 1989 to May 1989 peak-rate episode, when inflation was elevated—noted in the first row of the table. The easing cycle following this particular peak-rate episode began as core and headline PCE inflation were starting to come down from an elevated level, as illustrated in
figure 4
.
3
This figure shows headline and core inflation two years before and after the start date of each of the six easing cycles. The red line, which corresponds to the March 1989 peak-rate episode, stands out, with core PCE inflation at 4 percent at the beginning of the easing cycle, while all the other easing cycles show core PCE inflation at about 2 percent at commencement. Our situation today is closer to the norm during these episodes than to the exception, as PCE inflation is closer to 2 percent than to 4 percent.
Table 2
summarizes the reasons given in Federal Reserve documents at the time to explain the rationale for easing policy. When studying monetary policy cycles, it is important to recognize the often-multistage nature of cycles and, because of this, table 2 distinguishes between the reasons underpinning the start of the easing cycle, listed in column 2, and those underpinning subsequent easings, listed in column 3. One clear example of a cycle with different phases and involving more than one reason for easing is the most recent easing cycle—the one listed in the last row—which took place between August 2019 and March 2020. The initial 75 basis points of easing in this cycle were a result of downside risks to the U.S. economy due to weaker global growth and high trade uncertainties. The subsequent easings in this cycle were due to the disruptions to the economy resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Looking at table 2, two facts stand out. First, most easing cycles start because of concern about slowing economic growth. In table 2, the one exception is the easing cycle that started in July 1995 and is associated with what Alan Blinder (2023) has labeled a "perfect soft landing" example.
4
That particular easing cycle started predominantly because of reduced inflation concerns. All the other easing cycles started because either there was a concern about slowing economic growth, or, in one case, because there was a concern about slowing economic growth and there were reduced inflation concerns.
The second fact that stands out is that history is replete with events that complicate monetary policy decisions. The third column in table 2, which notes the reasons for subsequent easings, demonstrates this point. It shows that four out of the six easing cycles had multiple "easing phases," with later phases triggered by events like the 1991 Gulf War, the 9/11 terrorist attack, the Global Financial Crisis, and the pandemic. These events required policymakers to take a different course of policy easing from the course they may have anticipated earlier in the cycle. Specifically, because these events contributed to the contraction of economic activity, policymakers may have accelerated policy easing. The main messages that I see emerging from this review of the record are that policymakers need to remain vigilant and nimble, in case of adverse shocks hitting the economy, and that policymakers need some good luck.
The lesson that policymakers need to remain vigilant and nimble is further illustrated in
figure 5
, which shows the unemployment rate around the start of each easing cycle. As can be seen from this chart, in some easing cycles—for example, the easing cycles that began in January 2001, shown in blue, and September 2007, shown in green—the unemployment rate ramps up quickly, shortly after the easing cycle began. In both these cases, the economy weakened rapidly.
In the easing cycle that began in January 2001, moderating growth over the second half of 2000 gave way abruptly to sluggish growth around the end of the year. Economic weakness spread and intensified over the first half of 2001 and—as shown by the blue line—a year after the easing cycle began, the unemployment rate had increased just short of 2 percentage points.
In the easing cycle that began in September 2007, the macroeconomic data were not showing much weakening at the time of the cycle's first couple of rate cuts, although financial markets were exhibiting heightened and broad-based volatility and short-term funding markets were significantly impaired. It was only in December 2007 that incoming data started to show more significant spillovers of the housing downturn to other parts of the economy, while several financial firms also began to report larger-than-expected losses. As the green line in the chart shows, the unemployment rate was around 4-1/2 percent at the start of the 2007–08 easing cycle—having remained broadly stable around that level in 2006—but then rapidly rose to 6 percent within a year of the first easing. My motivation for discussing these two episodes is to highlight how quickly economic activity can weaken.
Another reason why policymakers need to watch all available information and be nimble in their decisionmaking is that developments concerning inflation can likewise change rapidly. This was highlighted recently by Russia's invasion of Ukraine in March 2022. The invasion compounded the effects of post-pandemic supply constraints on inflation. In addition, we always need to keep in mind the danger of easing too much in response to improvements in the inflation picture. Excessive easing can lead to a stalling or reversal in progress in restoring price stability. Former Fed Chair Paul Volcker stressed this danger in a 1981 speech, when he pointed to 1967 as a year when monetary policy eased in response to concerns about slowing economic growth and reduced inflation concerns, yet inflation subsequently turned back up.
Finally, another observation from reviewing past episodes is that careful easing in the July 1995 easing cycle allowed the FOMC to assess incoming data and other information to make sure that inflation was under control. As I noted earlier, the July 1995 easing cycle is associated with the so-called perfect soft landing. In this particular easing cycle, the FOMC started to ease as it observed a lessening in inflation concerns, left rates unchanged for three meetings as it waited for more information, and then continued to ease.
Lessons for Current Monetary Policy
With the knowledge of past experiences in hand, let me say a few words about the current monetary policy cycle and the extent to which future policy is likely to resemble, if at all, past experiences. Between March 2022 and July 2023, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate 5-1/4 percentage points. Our strong actions have moved our policy rate well into restrictive territory, and our restrictive stance of monetary policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. If the economy evolves broadly as expected, it will likely be appropriate to begin dialing back our policy restraint later this year.
Getting back to the title of my talk today: Will this time be different? My answer is, of course it will. Every time is different. But we can still learn from past episodes. We cannot know if there will be unanticipated exogenous shocks that require a policy response different from what will be envisaged at the beginning of the easing cycle. All we can do is assess the risks as best we can, given the available information and our best forecasts. In the absence of unanticipated exogenous shocks, policymakers can weigh multiple factors, including keeping policy restrictive enough to tamp down a possible resurgence of inflation due to the strength of aggregate demand or easing sooner to avoid an undue increase in unemployment. Unfortunately, the history that I have reviewed today suggests that we should not be surprised if some kind of unanticipated shock occurs. Given that we must accept that uncertainty is present, we consider the risks that can affect our outlook and forecasts.
Looking ahead, I see at least three key risks. First, as I mentioned at the beginning, consumer spending could be even more resilient than I currently expect it to be, which could cause progress on inflation to stall. Second, employment could weaken as the factors supporting economic growth fade. Third, geopolitical risks could remain elevated, and a widening of the conflict in the Middle East could have greater effects on commodity prices, such as oil, and on global financial markets.
I remain cautiously optimistic about our progress on inflation, and I will be reviewing the totality of incoming data in assessing the economic outlook and the risks surrounding the outlook and in judging the appropriate future course of monetary policy.
10
References
Blinder, Alan S. (2023). "Landings, Soft and Hard: The Federal Reserve, 1965–2022,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 37 (Winter), pp. 101–20.
Duesenberry, James S. (1949).
Income, Saving, and the Theory of Consumption Behavior.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Galí, Jordi (1994). "Keeping up with the Joneses: Consumption Externalities, Portfolio Choice, and Asset Prices,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 26 (February), pp. 1–8.
Lindsey, David (2003). "
A Modern History of FOMC Communication: 1975–2002 (PDF)
," memorandum, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, June 24.
Pollak, Robert, A. (1970). "Habit Formation and Dynamic Demand Functions,"
Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 78 (4, part 1), pp. 745–63.
Stigum, Marcia, and Anthony Crescenzi (2007).
Stigum's Money Market,
4th ed. McGraw-Hill.
Volcker, Paul (1981). "
Dealing with Inflation: Obstacles and Opportunities
," speech delivered at the Alfred M. Landon Lecture Series on Public Issues, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, April 15.
1. The start date of 1989 is motivated by the fact that this was the earliest cycle in which the FOMC was viewed as considering monetary policy actions in terms of discrete 25 basis point, 50 basis point, etc., rate moves in the federal funds rate target and, as such, is more comparable to today. See Stigum and Crescenzi (2007) for a discussion of the FOMC's increased focus on federal funds rate targeting in the late 1980s as well as Lindsey (2003), who describes the FOMC's further shift toward targeting the federal funds rate in 1989 by discontinuing the practice of targeting borrowed reserves.
Return to text
2. The PCE inflation numbers in table 1 are revised data, which means the data that policymakers were reviewing at the time—the so-called real-time data—could have been different. In addition, for some of these cycles, policymakers focused on CPI inflation more than PCE inflation. Also, note that while the table frequently references inflation relative to a 2 percent rate, it was only for the last peak-rate episode for which the FOMC had established a 2 percent rate of inflation to be most consistent over the longer run with its price-stability goal, per its first "Statement on Longer-run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy" adopted in January 2012.
Return to text
3. The data shown in figure 4 are revised data.
Return to text
4. Blinder (2023) labels the July 1995 episode as the "perfect soft landing" and identifies other "softish" landings (see his Table 1, page 119). Blinder (2023) defines a softish landing as an outcome in which real GDP declines by less than 1 percent or there is no NBER recession for at least a year after an FOMC tightening cycle.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 21
==================================================
December 01, 2023
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At a Fireside Chat at Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, President Gayle, and thank you for the invitation to visit today. I am fortunate to have been accompanied from Washington by a very distinguished graduate of Spelman College, Class of 1986 and member of Delta Sigma Theta, my Federal Reserve colleague Governor Lisa Cook. There is no greater testament to Spelman's historic legacy than the achievements of outstanding women like Governor Cook. One part of that legacy is Spelman's tradition of promoting education in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics). Governor Cook's research highlights the key role of such education in preparing individuals to be inventors and innovators who can generate ideas that will add to our body of knowledge, increase productivity, and generate higher living standards.
1
Her work is just one example of how Spelman women continue to make historic contributions in science, the arts, technology, medicine, and other fields.
I look forward to our conversation, and I thought I might frame it by talking about the Federal Reserve's actions to promote a healthy economy, and how those actions relate to questions students in this audience may be asking about the future. For example, I am sure that students are wondering what kind of a job market and economy you will be entering when you complete your education.
Congress assigned the Fed the dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. Both goals are essential aspects of a healthy economy. Congress also gave the Fed a precious grant of independence from direct political control to allow us to pursue those goals without consideration of political matters. Other major central banks in democratic societies have similar grants of independence, and this institutional arrangement has a strong track record of producing better policy outcomes for the benefit of the public.
To begin with our maximum employment goal, I am glad to say that, by many measures, conditions in the labor market are very strong. A couple of years ago, as the pandemic receded and the economy reopened, the number of job openings grew to greatly exceed the supply of people available to work, leaving a widespread shortage of workers. Today, labor market conditions remain very strong, and the economy is returning to a better balance between the demand for and supply of workers. The pace at which the economy is creating new jobs remains strong, and has been slowing toward a more sustainable level. That gradual slowing has come in part due to the efforts of the Fed to slow the growth of the economy to help reduce inflation. After declining sharply during the pandemic, the supply of workers has bounced back, as people have come back into the labor force and as immigration has returned to pre-pandemic levels. Partly because of that labor force growth, the unemployment rate has edged up over the second half of the year, though it remains historically low at 3.9 percent. The increase in participation has been particularly strong among women in the prime working ages of 25 to 54, which surged to an all-time high earlier this year, and which remains well above pre-pandemic levels. Wage growth remains high but has been gradually moving toward levels that would be more consistent with 2 percent price inflation over time, and real wages are growing again as inflation declines.
As for price stability, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has a longer-run goal of 2 percent inflation.
2
After running below 2 percent for over a decade, inflation increased sharply in 2021, in the United States and in many other countries around the world. High inflation imposes a significant hardship on all households and is especially painful for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. Beginning in early 2022, we reacted forcefully, raising our policy interest rate and decreasing the size of our balance sheet to help slow the economy and bring down inflation. Inflation has declined to 3 percent over the 12 months ending in October, but after factoring out energy and food prices, which tend to be volatile, what we call "core" inflation is still 3.5 percent, well above our 2 percent objective.
Over the six months ending in October, core inflation ran at an annual rate of 2.5 percent, and while the lower inflation readings of the past few months are welcome, that progress must continue if we are to reach our 2 percent objective. High inflation initially emerged from a collision between very strong demand and pandemic-constrained supply. The normalization of supply and demand conditions has played a critical role in the disinflation so far, as has the substantial tightening of monetary policy and overall financial conditions over the past two years.
3
The strong actions we have taken have moved our policy rate well into restrictive territory, meaning that tight monetary policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. Monetary policy is thought to affect economic conditions with a lag, and the full effects of our tightening have likely not yet been felt. The forcefulness of our response to inflation also helped maintain the Fed's hard-won credibility, ensuring that the public's expectations of future inflation remain well-anchored. Having come so far so quickly, the FOMC is moving forward carefully, as the risks of under- and over-tightening are becoming more balanced.
4
As the demand- and supply-related effects of the pandemic continue to unwind, uncertainty about the outlook for the economy is unusually elevated. Like most forecasters, my colleagues and I anticipate that growth in spending and output will slow over the next year, as the effects of the pandemic and the reopening fade and as restrictive monetary policy weighs on aggregate demand.
5
The FOMC is strongly committed to bringing inflation down to 2 percent over time, and to keeping policy restrictive until we are confident that inflation is on a path to that objective. It would be premature to conclude with confidence that we have achieved a sufficiently restrictive stance, or to speculate on when policy might ease. We are prepared to tighten policy further if it becomes appropriate to do so.
We are making decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks.
That is an overview of what my colleagues and I at the Fed are trying to accomplish. The bottom line, if you are a student, is that we have made considerable progress in reducing high inflation while maintaining a strong labor market, with a lot of opportunity for new graduates. The unemployment rate has risen a bit, but it is still very low by historical standards, and by many measures it is a great time to start your career. You will face challenging decisions soon about what professions to enter, and what companies and institutions to work for. Some of you will become entrepreneurs. You have already made one really good decision, and that is coming to Spelman. Whatever opportunities and challenges emerge, education will continue to be a key to success. Higher education is an investment, and not just of money. You are investing your time and great effort to gain knowledge and skills that are preparing you for successful careers. Your success will make for a stronger economy. For our part, at the Fed we are doing our best to foster an economy that gives you the best opportunity to succeed. With that, I will hand it back to you, President Gayle.
1. See, for example Lisa D. Cook, Janet Gerson, and Jennifer Kuan (2021), "
Closing the Innovation Gap in Pink and Black
," NBER Working Paper Series 29354 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October); and Lisa D. Cook (2020), "
Policies to Broaden Participation in the Innovation Process (PDF)
," Policy Proposal 2020-11 (Washington: Brookings Institution, The Hamilton Project, August).
Return to text
2. The FOMC judges that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate. For additional information, see the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf
.
Return to text
3. While the target range for the policy rate was not increased until March, the anticipated tapering and cessation of asset purchases, along with the signals sent in Committee communications, began tightening financial conditions during the fourth quarter of 2021. According to the Federal Reserve Board staff's index measuring U.S. financial conditions through their effect on the outlook for growth, financial conditions went from providing a 1.7 percentage point boost to future real gross domestic product growth in October 2021 to creating a 0.9 percentage point drag in October 2023; updated data and a description of the index is provided in Andrea Ajello, Michele Cavallo, Giovanni Favara, William B. Peterman, John W. Schindler IV, and Nitish R. Sinha (2023), "
A New Index to Measure U.S. Financial Conditions
," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 30).
Return to text
4. Beyond the uncertainty in the economic outlook, we face uncertainty about the precise level of monetary policy restraint and the duration of the lags with which monetary tightening affects economic activity and especially inflation; for further discussion see Jerome H. Powell (2023), "
Inflation: Progress and the Path Ahead
," speech delivered at "Structural Shifts in the Global Economy," an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 25.
Return to text
5. For example, the November 2023 Blue Chip consensus forecast is for Q4-over-Q4 real GDP growth to drop from 2.5 percent in 2023 to 0.8 percent in 2024.
Return to text


Discurso 22
==================================================
November 14, 2023
Elevated Economic Uncertainty: Causes and Consequences
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At  “Global Risk, Uncertainty, and Volatility,” a research conference sponsored by  the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Swiss National Bank and the Bank for International Settlements, Zurich, Switzerland (virtual)
Share
Watch Live
*
*
*
Introduction
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. I am very much attuned to the important work that you're doing on uncertainty. Indeed, as a monetary policymaker, the subject is rarely far from my mind. It's not a new subject, of course. John Maynard Keynes and Frank Knight provided book-length treatments of the subject a century ago (Keynes, 1921; Knight, 1921). In addition, in 2003, Alan Greenspan observed, "Uncertainty is not just an important feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape" (Greenspan, 2003).
Before I begin, let me remind you that the views I express today are my own and are not necessarily shared by my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.
My plan is to talk about recent advances in how to measure uncertainty, what may cause uncertainty, what effect uncertainty may have on economic outcomes, and the conduct of monetary policy in the presence of uncertainty.
Defining and measuring uncertainty
Uncertainty is not directly observable in the same way inflation and economic output are observable. It is therefore more difficult to measure. To complicate matters further, there are three related concepts that are often used interchangeably: risk, volatility, and uncertainty. According to Frank Knight, risk describes a situation in which the outcome is unknown, but the probability distribution governing that outcome is known. Volatility, often used synonymously with risk, is a statistical measure of the variation in observed outcomes. In contrast, uncertainty is characterized by both an unknown outcome and an unknown probability distribution. These concepts are used interchangeably, in part, because empirically it can be difficult to identify them separately, and because they all capture aspects of what policymakers do not know when making decisions. Therefore, the uncertainty measures I will discuss are a mixture of these three concepts, and a theme for me will be the necessity of monetary policymakers to consider what they
don't
know in their decisionmaking, an argument often attributed to Friedrich Hayek (1974).
Notwithstanding the difficulty in measuring uncertainty, economists have developed tools to assess it. In fact, in the past two decades, there has been tremendous growth in research devoted to the subject. In my talk today, I will focus on four broad categories of uncertainty measures: text-based, survey-based, econometric-based, and financial market-based measures.
1
There have been advances in all four categories, and there are advantages and disadvantages to each of these measures.
One example of text-based measures of uncertainty is that by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016), who created an uncertainty index based on the number of leading newspaper articles that contain a combination of words related to economic policy uncertainty. They showed that newspaper text-based measures are highly correlated with stock price volatility, and that higher values of these measures are associated with lower investment and employment. An advantage of these measures is that they are high-frequency, real-time measures that can narrow the type of uncertainty being measured by linking particular words regarding uncertainty to a specific topic, such as inflation or monetary policy. A limitation of these measures is that they suffer from dual causality with the economic outcomes we are trying to measure, and therefore it is difficult to use them to ascertain what impact (if any) uncertainty has on economic outcomes. For example, does stock price volatility cause journalists to worry about uncertainty, or is the uncertainty discussed in newspaper articles causing volatility? I note, though, that this disadvantage is common to all four broad categories of uncertainty measures to greater or lesser degrees.
The second set of uncertainty measures is survey based. These measures use responses to questions by households, businesses, and market participants about their forecasts and how certain they are about those forecasts. Advantages of survey-based measures are that they are explicit about the segments of society facing uncertainty, and they are relatively precise in pinpointing the horizon over which the uncertainty prevails. Disadvantages are that these measures are not necessarily timely in capturing uncertainty around fast-breaking new events, and, depending on the issue, they may be less representative than those based on the news.
The third set of uncertainty measures is econometric based. In general, these calculate how far off econometric model forecasts are from actual values at each point in time. Intuitively, when uncertainty increases, it becomes harder to predict economic variables. Advantages of these measures are that they are easy to interpret and calculate and are less prone to dual causality associated with the economic outcomes of interest. Disadvantages are that they are sensitive to the choice of the econometric forecasting model used to calculate them, and their timeliness depends on the availability of the data the forecasting model uses.
The last set of uncertainty measures is market-based measures, which use financial market prices to estimate either realized volatility or option-implied volatility. For example, one widely used uncertainty measure is the Chicago Board of Options Exchange's Volatility Index, the VIX, which is calculated using equity index options that measure market participants' expectations for the volatility of the S&P 500 index over the coming 30 days. The advantages and disadvantages of these measures are similar to the text-based measures: They are high-frequency, real-time estimates of market participants' views, but they suffer from dual causality with the economic outcomes we are trying to measure. An additional disadvantage is that it is often difficult to specify the type of uncertainty being measured.
Current state of uncertainty
Based on the range of measures discussed above, what can we say about the current state of uncertainty?
Figure 1
shows three measures of uncertainty. The red line is an econometric-based measure constructed by Federal Reserve Board staff (Londono, Ma, and Wilson, 2023) called U.S. economic uncertainty. According to this measure, U.S. economic uncertainty reached an all-time high at the onset of the pandemic, came down slightly after the pandemic, but has remained elevated ever since. Consistent with this measure, policymakers, including Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants and central bankers around the globe, have been emphasizing the elevated level of uncertainty, especially related to inflation, and the challenge this poses for monetary policy. Since the onset of the pandemic, most FOMC participants have been indicating in the Summary of Economic Projections that they view uncertainty around their forecast of personal consumption expenditure inflation to be higher than the average level of uncertainty over the past 20 years. But we policymakers are not alone in this. The July 2023 and September 2023 issues of the Federal Reserve Beige Book, which summarizes the commentary on current economic conditions of businesses, repeat the words "uncertain" and "uncertainty" much more than the historical average and with much of the uncertainty associated with inflation.
2
In contrast to policymakers and commentary from businesses and the econometric-based U.S. economic uncertainty measure, the other two uncertainty measures in figure 1—the VIX index, the black line, and the news-based economic policy uncertainty measure, the blue line—declined quickly after the onset of the pandemic in 2020 and have remained relatively subdued since then. One interpretation of the divergence in the measures is that they are capturing different aspects of uncertainty. Over the past year or so, the lack of predictability of economic outcomes, as captured by the elevated econometric-based U.S. economic uncertainty measure, did not lead to heightened expectations of near-term equity market volatility by market participants or to a higher frequency of discussions of economic policy uncertainty in the news. This leads me to the next topics I want to discuss—namely, what causes uncertainty to increase, and does it matter that the harder-to-predict outcomes are not correlated, at least for now, with a higher VIX index?
What causes uncertainty to increase?
Figure 2
shows the econometric-based U.S. economic uncertainty measure since 1960, scaled in standard deviations from its mean. The figure illustrates a certainty about uncertainty: Uncertainty tends to increase during recessions, the shaded gray areas in the graph. Economic theory offers four mechanisms through which bad events—such as recessions, oil supply disruptions, terrorist attacks, wars, and pandemics—can increase uncertainty (Bloom, 2014). First, it is easier to predict the future when "business as usual" prevails in a growing economy (Orlik and Veldkamp, 2022). Forecasting is harder during recessions and when bad events hit the economy. This was especially the case during the pandemic, a once-in-a-century disturbance of worldwide consequence. Some have even argued that the pandemic has caused structural changes that will make it harder to predict future economic outcomes. Second, when business is good, firms are trading actively, which helps to generate and spread information (Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp 2006; Fajgelbaum, Schaal, and Taschereau-Dumouchel, 2017). Bad events disrupt trading activity and the flow of information, and this lack of information increases uncertainty. Third, public policy that is unclear, hyperactive, or both may raise uncertainty (Pastor and Veronesi, 2013). Fourth, when business is slow, it is cheap to try new ideas and to divert unused resources to research and development; this dynamic leads to microeconomic uncertainty, which may in turn lead to macroeconomic uncertainty (Bachmann and Moscarini, 2011; D'Erasmo and Moscoso-Boedo, 2011).
Of these four theoretical mechanisms, the first one strikes me as a highly likely explanation for uncertainty remaining high today. We are still learning about the effects of pandemic-specific factors on the economy. Additionally, heightened geopolitical risks have recently contributed to increased uncertainty.
3
In
figure 3
, I decompose the econometric-based U.S. economic uncertainty measure into three subcomponents to investigate which economic outcomes are harder to predict since the pandemic and after the increase in geopolitical tensions. The subcomponents are inflation indicators, the black line; labor market conditions, the red line; and economic output, the blue line. All three subcomponents rose significantly during the pandemic but have behaved quite differently since 2021, with inflation uncertainty becoming the dominant source of aggregate economic uncertainty, especially since the Russian invasion of Ukraine. A message one could take from this is that, through the eyes of an econometrician with a rich set of predictors, inflation over the past two years was objectively difficult to predict.
The rise in inflation and inflation uncertainty in the post-COVID era has been a global phenomenon. The left panel of slide 7,
figure 4.1
, plots an econometric-based foreign economic uncertainty index calculated as the equally weighted average of the measures of 38 foreign countries. As in the case of the U.S. economic uncertainty index, the foreign index spikes around the Global Financial Crisis and soars around the COVID pandemic, and it has remained quite elevated since, at around 3 standard deviations from its historical mean. The right panel of slide 7, figure 4.2, shows the components of foreign economic uncertainty: inflation, the black line; labor, the red line; and output, the blue line. Again, as in the U.S., foreign inflation uncertainty has become the dominant source of economic uncertainty.
What effect may uncertainty have on economic outcomes?
Now that I have established that some measures of economic uncertainty are elevated, one may wonder, to what extent does it matter? Economic theory offers at least two channels for uncertainty to influence growth negatively.
4
The first channel comes from the "real options" literature and the fact that the option value of waiting to make decisions increases with uncertainty (for example, Bernanke, 1983). According to this theory, it is optimal for firms to not invest and to not hire new employees when uncertainty is high. This lack of investment and hiring in turn exacerbates recessions. The second channel comes from the reaction of financial markets to uncertainty. Investors require compensation for higher risk and uncertainty in the form of higher risk premia, which manifests in lower equity prices, and higher borrowing costs. In the presence of financial constraints, these tighter financial conditions will reduce economic growth (for example, Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno, 2014). In addition, higher uncertainty is often accompanied by higher equity market volatility and illiquidity, which in turn exacerbates uncertainty. As I mentioned earlier, the elevated econometric-based uncertainty measure this past year has not been accompanied by higher equity market volatility, as measured by the VIX index. This suggests that the economic effects of the higher economic uncertainty may be somewhat mitigated, relative to the more serious case where higher economic uncertainty is accompanied by a higher VIX index (Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng, 2021).
Because uncertainty can influence growth negatively, policymakers often aim to reduce uncertainty about their objectives. One way they attempt to do this is by adopting a systematic approach to achieving their objectives, as circumstances allow. This point leads me to my final topic, the conduct of monetary policy in the presence of uncertainty.
What should policy makers do when uncertainty is high?
In 1967, William Brainard argued that uncertainty about the power of monetary policy implied that policy should respond more cautiously to shocks than would be the case if this uncertainty did not exist (Brainard, 1967). Brainard's
attenuation principle
is a classic example of what has come to be known as the Bayesian approach to uncertainty and is often cited as the foundation for gradualism in the adjustment of monetary policy: Calculate what you think your best policy response is for the economy you observe—and then do less.
It is often suggested, however, that the ambiguity aversion approach to uncertainty leads to
anti-attenuation
. That is, in the face of uncertainty over which a policymaker is unwilling or unable to attach prior probabilities, the appropriate response is to apply stronger monetary medicine than in the certainty equivalence case. For example, as Chair Powell mentioned in a speech in 2018 that, during crisis periods, words like "we will do whatever it takes" will likely be more effective than "we will take cautious steps" (Powell, 2018).
Advocates for both approaches have their theoretical justifications. In practice, however, the best response to uncertainty can be context specific and can vary over time.
5
Fortunately, sometimes the context leads to the same conclusion, broadly speaking, regardless of the approach. One case of perennial interest to central bankers is inflation persistence where both the Bayesian and ambiguity aversion approaches tend to lead to policy that is stronger than the certainty equivalent case to forestall the possibility of inflationary forces becoming embedded in inflation expectations.
6
Conclusions
Let me end where I began. Monetary policymakers need to consider what they
don't
know in their decisionmaking, along with what they do know. This is not a new idea. We have long appreciated that policy decisions under uncertainty should consider a range of possible scenarios about the state, and the structure, of the economy. Economic history and recent research have sharpened some of the questions, even if they have not produced the easy policy narratives we might prefer. What is clear is that policy decisions taken under uncertainty may look quite different from those that would be optimal under certainty, and properly so.
The fact that economic agents are uncertain about
their
environment and must learn about the economy—and policy—means that monetary policy can be a positive force in stabilizing expectations. In my thinking, this prospect serves as a reason for central banks to strive for predictability and transparency in policy actions and communications while avoiding the hubris of overrepresenting the state of our knowledge.
References
Abel, Andrew B. (1983). "Optimal Investment under Uncertainty,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 73 (March), pp. 228–33.
Adam, Klaus, and Michael Woodford (2012). "Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy in a Microfounded New Keynesian Model,"
Journal of Monetary Economics
,
vol. 59 (July), pp. 468–87.
Bachmann, Ruediger, and Giuseppe Moscarini (2011). "Business Cycles and Endogenous Uncertainty," 2011 Meeting Papers 36, Society for Economic Dynamics.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis (2016). "Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 131 (November), pp. 1593–636.
Bar-Ilan, Avner, and William C. Strange (1996). "Investment Lags,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 86 (June), pp. 610–22.
Barlevy, Gadi (2011). "Robustness and Macroeconomic Policy,"
Annual Review of Economics
,
vol. 3, pp. 1–24.
Bernanke, Ben S. (1983). "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 98 (February), pp. 85–106.
——— (2007). "
Monetary Policy under Uncertainty
," speech delivered at the 32nd Annual Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, October 19.
Bloom, Nicholas (2014). "Fluctuations in Uncertainty,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 28 (Spring), pp. 153–76.
Brainard, William C. (1967). "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,"
American Economic Review
,
vol. 57 (May), pp. 411–25.
Caldara, Dario, and Matteo Iacoviello (2022). "Measuring Geopolitical Risk,"
American Economic Review
,
vol. 112 (April), pp. 1194–225.
Cascaldi-Garcia, Danilo, Cisil Sarisoy, Juan M. Londono, Bo Sun, Deepa D. Datta, Thiago Ferreira, Olesya Grishchenko, Mohammad R. Jahan-Parvar, Francesca Loria, Sai Ma, Marius Rodriguez, Ilknur Zer, and John Rogers (2023). "What Is Certain about Uncertainty?"
Journal of Economic Literature
,
vol. 61 (June), pp. 624–54.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno (2014). "Risk Shocks,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 104 (January), pp. 27–65.
D'Erasmo, Pablo N., and Hernan J. Moscoso-Boedo (2011). "Intangibles and Endogenous Firm Volatility over the Business Cycle," Virginia Economics Online Papers 400, University of Virginia, Department of Economics.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Edouard Schaal, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel (2017). "Uncertainty Traps,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics
,
vol. 132 (November), pp. 1641–92.
Greenspan, Alan (2003). "
Monetary Policy under Uncertainty
," speech delivered at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 29.
Hartman, Richard (1972). "The Effects of Price and Cost Uncertainty on Investment,"
Journal of
Economic Theory,
vol. 5 (October), pp. 258–66.
Hayek, Friedrich A. (1974). "The Pretence of Knowledge," Alfred Nobel Memorial Lecture delivered at the Stockholm School of Economics, Stockholm, December 11.
Keynes, John Maynard (1921).
A Treatise on Probability.
London: Macmillan.
Knight, Frank H. (1921).
Risk, Uncertainty and Profit
.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Londono, Juan M., Sai Ma, and Beth Anne Wilson (2023). "
Global Inflation Uncertainty and its Economic Effects
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25, 2023.
Ludvigson, Sydney C., Sai Ma, and Serena Ng (2021). "Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous Impulse or Endogenous Response?"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
,
vol. 13 (October), pp. 369–410.
Oi, Walter Y.
(
1961). "The Desirability of Price Instability under Perfect Competition,"
Econometrica
,
vol. 29 (January), pp. 58–64.
Orlik, Anna, and Laura Veldkamp (2022). "
Understanding Uncertainty Shocks and the Role of the Black Swans
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-083. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December.
Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi (2013). "Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia,"
Journal of Financial Economics
,
vol. 110 (December), pp. 520–45.
Powell, Jerome H. (2018). "Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "
Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy
," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24.
Söderstrom, Ulf (2002). "Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters,"
Scandinavian Journal of Economics
,
vol. 104 (March), pp. 125–45.
Tetlow, Robert (2019). "The Monetary Policy Response to Uncertain Inflation Persistence,"
Economics Letters
,
vol. 175 (February), pp. 5–8.
Tetlow, Robert, and Peter von zur Muehlen (2001). "Robust Monetary Policy with Misspecified Models: Does Model Uncertainty Always Call for Attenuated Policy?"
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
,
vol. 25 (June), pp. 911–49.
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp (2006). "Learning Asymmetries in Real Business Cycles,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 53 (May), pp. 753–72.
1. For a detailed description of these four categories of uncertainty measures, please see Cascaldi-Garcia and others (2023).
Return to text
2. The historical average is computed over the sample period from 1996 to the present.
Return to text
3. See, for example, Caldara and Iacoviello (2022) for a measure of geopolitical risk.
Return to text
4. Economic theory also offers at least two channels for uncertainty to influence growth positively. The "growth options" theory argues that uncertainty can encourage investment if it increases the potential prize (Bar-Ilan and Strange, 1996). The "Oi-Hartman-Abel" theory after Oi (1961), Hartman (1972), and Abel (1983), argues that if firms can expand to exploit good outcomes and contract to insure against bad outcomes, they may be risk loving.
Return to text
5. See Barlevy (2011) for an accessible survey and Tetlow and von zur Muehlen (2001) for a more technical treatment.
Return to text
6. Bernanke (2007) and Powell (2018) highlight this case. Söderstöm (2002) establishes the result for the Bayesian case. Tetlow (2019) is a simple demonstration of that case alongside the ambiguity aversion case. Adam and Woodford (2012) show that uncertainty regarding the data generating process for inflation in the New Keynesian model retains as the optimal policy the same general form as in the standard model but with a more aggressive response to inflation.
Return to text
*On November 14, 2023, a revised version of Figure 1 was posted. The date range of the x-axis was changed from 2019 through 2024 to 2018 through 2023.
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 23
==================================================
November 09, 2023
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At "Monetary Policy Challenges in a Global Economy," a policy panel at the 24th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, hosted by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
Share
Watch Live
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in today's panel discussion. My assigned topic is U.S. monetary policy in the current global inflation episode. I will briefly address the U.S. outlook and then turn to three broader questions raised by the historic events of the pandemic era.
*
U.S. inflation has come down over the past year but remains well above our 2 percent target (
figure 1
).
1
My colleagues and I are gratified by this progress but expect that the process of getting inflation sustainably down to 2 percent has a long way to go. The labor market remains tight, although improvements in labor supply and a gradual easing in demand continue to move it into better balance.
2
Gross domestic product growth in the third quarter was quite strong, but, like most forecasters, we expect growth to moderate in coming quarters. Of course, that remains to be seen, and we are attentive to the risk that stronger growth could undermine further progress in restoring balance to the labor market and in bringing inflation down, which could warrant a response from monetary policy. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is committed to achieving a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time; we are not confident that we have achieved such a stance. We know that ongoing progress toward our 2 percent goal is not assured: Inflation has given us a few head fakes. If it becomes appropriate to tighten policy further, we will not hesitate to do so. We will continue to move carefully, however, allowing us to address both the risk of being misled by a few good months of data, and the risk of overtightening. We are making decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks, determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time. We will keep at it until the job is done.
With that, I will turn to three questions that have arisen from the receding but still elevated inflation we are experiencing today. The first question is, with the benefit of 2‑1/2 years to look back, what we can say about the initial causes and ongoing policy implications of the current inflation.
After running below our 2 percent target over the first year of the pandemic, core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation rose sharply in March 2021. Economic forecasters generally did not see this coming, as shown by the February 2021 Survey of Professional Forecasters, which showed core PCE inflation running at or below target over the subsequent three years.
3
The real-time questions for policymakers were what caused the high inflation and how policy should react. At the outset, many forecasters and analysts, including FOMC participants, viewed the sudden upturn in inflation as mostly a function of pandemic-related shifts in the composition of demand, a disruption of supply chains, and a sharp decline in labor supply. The resulting supply and demand imbalances led to large increases in the prices of a range of items most directly affected by the pandemic, especially goods. In this view, as the pandemic abated, our dynamic and flexible economy was likely to adapt fairly quickly. Supply disruptions and shortages would diminish. Labor supply would rebound, aided by the arrival of vaccines and the reopening of schools. Elevated demand for goods would shift back to services. Inflation would ease reasonably quickly without the need for a significant policy response.
4
Indeed, although monthly core PCE inflation spiked in March and April of 2021, beginning in May it declined for five consecutive months, providing some support for this view (
figure 2
). But in the fourth quarter of 2021, the data clearly changed amid waves of new COVID-19 variants, with only gradual progress in restoring global supply chains, and relatively few workers rejoining the labor force. That lack of progress, combined with very strong demand from households, contributed to a tight economy and a historically tight labor market, and more persistent high inflation.
The Committee signaled a change in our policy approach, and financial conditions began to tighten. A new shock arrived in February 2022, when Russia invaded Ukraine, resulting in a sharp increase in energy and other commodity prices. When we lifted off in March, it was clear that bringing down inflation would depend both on the unwinding of the unprecedented pandemic-related demand and supply distortions and on our tightening of monetary policy, which would slow the growth of aggregate demand, allowing supply time to catch up. Today, these two processes are working together to bring inflation down. The FOMC has raised the federal funds rate target range by 5-1/4 percentage points and reduced our securities holdings by more than $1 trillion. Monetary policy is in restrictive territory and putting downward pressure on demand and inflation.
The unwinding of pandemic-related supply and demand distortions is playing an important role in the decline of inflation. For example, wage growth has steadily fallen by most measures since mid-2022 (
figure 3
), despite continued robust job gains, reflecting a resurgence in labor supply thanks to higher labor force participation and a return of immigration to pre-pandemic levels.
While the broader supply recovery continues, it is not clear how much more will be achieved by additional supply-side improvements. Going forward, it may be that a greater share of the progress in reducing inflation will have to come from tight monetary policy restraining the growth of aggregate demand.
5
Turning to my second question, for many years, it has been generally thought that monetary policy should limit its response to, or "look through," supply shocks to the extent that they are temporary and idiosyncratic.
6
Many argue as well that, in the future, supply disruptions are likely to be more frequent or more persistent than in the decades just before the pandemic.
7
A second question, then, is what we have learned about the standard "looking through" approach.
The idea that the response to the inflationary effects of supply shocks should be attenuated arises, in part, from the tradeoff presented by those shocks. Supply shocks tend to move prices and employment in opposite directions, whereas monetary policy pushes each in the same direction. Therefore, the response of monetary policy to higher prices stemming from an adverse supply shock should be attenuated because it would otherwise amplify the unwanted decline in employment.
8
In addition, supply shocks have most frequently come from the volatile food and energy categories and have passed quickly. While food and energy prices critically affect the budgets of households and businesses, the policy tools of central banks work more slowly than commodity markets move. Responding aggressively to quickly passing price increases could exacerbate macroeconomic volatility without supporting price stability.
Our experience since 2020 highlights some limits of that thinking. To begin with, it can be challenging to disentangle supply shocks from demand shocks in real time, and also to determine how long either will persist, particularly in the extraordinary circumstances of the past three years. Supply shocks that have a persistent effect on potential output could call for restrictive policy to better align aggregate demand with the suppressed level of aggregate supply. The sequence of shocks to global supply chains experienced from 2020 to 2022 suppressed output for a considerable time and may have persistently altered global supply dynamics. Such a sequence calls on policymakers to use policy restraint to limit inflationary effects.
Policy restraint in this case is also good risk management. Supply shocks that drive inflation high enough for long enough can affect the longer-term inflation expectations of households and businesses. Monetary policy must forthrightly address any risks of a potential de-anchoring of inflation expectations, as well-anchored expectations help facilitate bringing inflation back to our target. The sharp policy tightening during 2022 likely contributed to keeping inflation expectations well anchored.
My third question is the level where interest rates will settle once the effects of the pandemic are truly behind us. By 2019, the general level of nominal interest rates had declined steadily over several decades (
figure 4
). As the pandemic arrived, many advanced economies had below-target inflation and low or mildly negative policy rates, raising difficult questions about the efficacy of interest rate policy when constrained by the effective lower bound (ELB). Over two decades, an extensive literature had identified a number of possible changes to the widely used inflation-targeting regime, including negative policy rates, nominal income targeting, and various forms of makeup strategies under which persistent shortfalls in inflation would be followed by a period of inflation running moderately above 2 percent.
9
Today, inflation and policy rates are elevated, and the ELB is not currently relevant for our policy decisions. But it is too soon to say whether the monetary policy challenges of the ELB will ultimately turn out to be a thing of the past.
The prolonged proximity of interest rates to the ELB was at the heart of the monetary policy review and the changes we made to our framework in 2020. We will begin our next five-year review in the latter half of 2024 and announce the results about a year later. Among the questions we will consider is the degree to which the structural features of the economy that led to low interest rates in the pre-pandemic era will persist. With time, we will continue to learn from the experience of the past few years, and what implications it may hold for monetary policy.
These are just three of the many questions raised by these challenging times, and we are far from a complete understanding of the answers. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss these issues with you today and look forward to our conversation.
1. Inflation under our preferred measure, the 12-month change in the total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, has declined from 6.6 percent in September 2022 to 3.4 percent in September 2023. The 12-month change in the core PCE measure, which excludes the volatile food and energy prices and therefore may provide a better signal of where inflation is headed, has declined from 5.5 percent in September 2022 to 3.7 percent in September 2023.
Return to text
2. The labor force participation rate has moved up since late last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years, where that rate has increased by nearly 1 percentage point, on net, since December. Private payrolls increased by an average of 191,000 per month over the 12 months ending in October 2023, down from a rate of 435,000 per month over the 12 months ending in October 2022. Meanwhile, both the quits rate and the wage premium for job switchers have returned to their pre-pandemic ranges. And while they remain above a level that would be consistent with 2 percent inflation in the longer run, broad indicators of 12-month wage growth continue to trend lower.
Return to text
3. The median projections of Q4-to-Q4 core PCE inflation from the February 2021 Survey of Professional Forecasters were 1.8 percent, 1.9 percent, and 2.0 percent for 2021, 2022, and 2023, respectively.
Return to text
4. Both the June Summary of Economic Projections and the August Survey of Professional Forecasters showed a near-uniform view that the incipient inflation would pass quickly and that inflation for 2022 would run near 2 percent. Neither the forecasters nor policymakers foresaw more than a modest tightening of monetary policy.
Return to text
5. See, for example, Ben Bernanke and Olivier Blanchard (2023), "
What Caused the U.S. Pandemic-Era Inflation?
" Hutchins Center Working Paper 86 (Washington: Brookings Institution, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, June).
Return to text
6. As I will return to later, this presumes that inflation expectations are well anchored.
Return to text
7. See, for example, Agustín Carstens (2022), "
A Story of Tailwinds and Headwinds: Aggregate Supply and Macroeconomic Stabilization (PDF)
," remarks delivered at "Reassessing Constraints on the Economy and Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26.
Return to text
8. For an example in the context of energy price shocks, see Martin Bodenstein, Christopher J. Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2008), "Optimal Monetary Policy with Distinct Core and Headline Inflation Rates,"
Journal of Monetary Economics
,
supp., vol. 55 (October), pp. S18–33.
Return to text
9. A number of these topics were discussed in the analytical work supporting the 2019–20 framework review; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications
," webpage. For a discussion of the effect of the ELB on monetary policy strategy, see Fernando Duarte, Benjamin K. Johannsen, Leonardo Melosi, and Taisuke Nakata (2020), "
Strengthening the FOMC's Framework in View of the Effective Lower Bound and Some Considerations Related to Time-Inconsistent Strategies
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-067 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August). For additional information about the efficacy and use of certain policy tools in this environment, see Jonas Arias, Martin Bodenstein, Hess Chung, Thorsten Drautzburg, and Andrea Raffo (2020), "
Alternative Strategies: How Do They Work? How Might They Help?
" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-068 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August); Jeffrey Campbell, Thomas B. King, Anna Orlik, and Rebecca Zarutskie (2020), "
Issues regarding the Use of the Policy Rate Tool
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-070 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August); and Mark Carlson, Stefania D'Amico, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, Bernd Schlusche, and Paul Wood (2020), "
Issues in the Use of the Balance Sheet Tool
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-071 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 24
==================================================
November 08, 2023
Research and Statistics Centennial Anniversary: Past, Present and Future
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At "A Look at the Past, Present, and Future," a conference celebrating the Centennial of the Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C.
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Stacey, and thank you to the organizers for a thought-provoking conference.
1
Provoking thought and discussion are very fitting ways to mark the centenary of the Division of Research and Statistics (R&S).
In keeping with the conference theme, I have organized my remarks around the past, present, and future of R&S. My reflection on the past, while idiosyncratic, is also, I believe, indicative of a through line that characterizes the division historically. For me, that past begins in 1983, when I came to the Board as a newly minted college graduate to be a research assistant (RA) in the Government Finance Section, now known as Fiscal Analysis. One of our primary tasks was to keep track of the volatile, and somewhat unpredictable, fluctuations in tax receipts. The daily numbers were transmitted not by computer, but by telephone. Other data retrieval required RAs to go to the Treasury directly in the luxurious conveyance of a D.C. taxicab, reimbursed by the Board—a little perk that, as it happened, never came my way. In our section, though, it was a lot of time on the phone, and the two economists I worked with, Al Teplin and Wolf Ramm, would take down the numbers and pass them to me.
Obviously, many things have changed in R&S over the past 40 years. But one thing that hasn't changed much is the role of RAs in analyzing data and participating in other important functions performed by the division. Back then, armed with those tax receipt numbers, I would be expected to put together a projection. My bosses had their own projections, of course, and they subjected my work to very careful review. But I was given that assignment because there was a widespread view then that RAs were here to learn and to contribute meaningfully to research and policy work, and I felt a considerable responsibility to do the very best I could with the important work I had been given. Much has changed at R&S, but those values remain. As a young college graduate, I was impressed with how seriously people in R&S took their responsibilities, whatever their role. I am not the only person whose experience as a young person in R&S was formative. In my case, it might seem remarkable that a former R&S RA has returned as Vice Chair, but for decades, former RAs have been returning and serving in leadership roles at the Board and throughout the System.
Moving from the past to the present, it has been a while since the things we thought we understood well about the economy were subject to as much debate as they are today. At the same time, an explosion of available data, much of it of high frequency and from unconventional or alternative sources, has given R&S many more potential avenues for analyzing the economy and, hence, much more to do. The list of alternative data sources available to forecast economic outcomes seems almost endless, including social media posts and web traffic, credit card purchases, geolocation, and satellite imagery. These alternative data have transformed the way economists forecast future outcomes and measure the effectiveness of monetary policy. For example, economists can use postings to social media sites to analyze investors', journalists', and households' real-time interpretation of central bank communications.
2
However, a wealth of data does not necessarily translate into better forecasts and better insights. Recent academic research suggests that alternative data mainly help forecast short-term outcomes and not so much long-term outcomes.
3
This is why it is important that R&S continues to be at the forefront of research, making sure we are making the right inferences with new tools and new data sources.
With respect to the future, my expectation is that today's challenges will persist. I have already mentioned one challenge, which is to make sure we are acquiring the right "alternative" data, making the right inferences, and appropriately using tools such as artificial intelligence, including machine learning, to analyze this wealth of data. These tools may be very good at estimating correlations, but we know that correlation does not imply causation; thus, their usefulness may be limited. Identifying a correlation in the data without identifying causation may lead policymakers to incorrect conclusions and therefore lead us to implement inappropriate policies. In addition, these tools are very good at data mining, which can be dangerous if it gives us the false sense that a good in-sample fit leads to a good out-of-sample forecasting model. Economists in R&S and other divisions, as well as academics, have made progress on this front, but there is room for further improvement. In addition to the challenge of how to best use these tools and data at the Fed, R&S faces the challenge of understanding what these new technologies mean for labor productivity and the economy.
The other challenge I want to highlight is that of making decisions under uncertainty. This is not a new challenge, of course. John Maynard Keynes and Frank Knight provided book-length treatments of the subject a century ago (Keynes, 1921; Knight, 1921). In addition, in 2003, Alan Greenspan observed, "Uncertainty is not just an important feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape" (Greenspan, 2003). The fact that uncertainty has been a challenge for so long makes me think that it will continue be a challenge going forward, and in the wake of the pandemic, it is highly salient.
In 1967, William Brainard argued that uncertainty about the power of monetary policy implied that policy should respond more cautiously to shocks than would be the case if this uncertainty did not exist (Brainard, 1967). Brainard's
attenuation principle
is a classic example of what has come to be known as the Bayesian approach to uncertainty and is often cited as the foundation for the gradualism in the adjustment of monetary policy. That said, methods based on theories of ambiguity aversion led to
anti-attenuation
. In other words, to protect against uncertainty, the appropriate response may be a quick and strong monetary policy response. Of course, the right response to uncertainty is probably context specific and thus varies over time.
As Chair Powell mentioned in a speech in 2018, there are two particularly important cases in which doing too little when there is high uncertainty comes with higher costs than doing too much (Powell, 2018). The first case is when attempting to avoid severely adverse events such as a financial crisis. In this situation, words like "we will do whatever it takes" will likely be more effective than "we will take cautious steps." The second case is when inflation expectations threaten to become unanchored. If expectations were to begin to drift, the reality or expectation of a weak monetary policy response would exacerbate the problem.
4
How to respond to uncertainty is a matter that the Federal Open Market Committee, with the help of R&S, has been wrestling with for a long time. While I could be wrong, as of today, I do not foresee that some all-powerful artificial intelligence will be able to perfectly balance the risks of doing too little or too much. Therefore, I expect that long into the future, we'll be relying on the knowledge and good judgment of the people of R&S to weigh the risks and to help in providing options to monetary policymakers so that they can make informed decisions.
In closing, congratulations on a century of service to the Fed and the American people. I have every expectation that the next 100 years of the Division of Research and Statistics will be just as integral to the prosperity and well-being of the American people as it has been to date.
Thank you!
References
Brainard, William C. (1967). "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy,"
American Economic Review
,
vol. 57 (May), pp. 411–25.
Dessaint, Olivier, Thierry Foucault, and Laurent Fresard (2023). "Does Alternative Data Improve Financial Forecasting? The Horizon Effect,"
Journal of Finance
,
forthcoming.
Greenspan, Alan (2003). "
Monetary Policy under Uncertainty
," speech delivered at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming (August 29).
Keynes, John Maynard (1921).
A Treatise on Probability.
London: Macmillan.
Knight, Frank H. (1921).
Risk, Uncertainty and Profit
.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Powell, Jerome H. (2018). "
Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy
," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming (August 24).
Schmanski, Bennett, Chiara Scotti, Clara Vega, and Hedi Benamar (2023). "
Fed Communication, News, Twitter, and Echo Chambers
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2023-036. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May.
Söderstrom, Ulf (2002). "Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters,"
Scandinavian Journal of Economics
,
vol. 104 (March), pp. 125–45.
1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. For an example of recent research that looks at Twitter posts during FOMC days, see Schmanski and others (2023).
Return to text
3. Dessaint, Foucault, and Fresard (2023) find that alternative data mainly helps forecast short-term outcomes.
Return to text
4. For example, Soderstrom (2002) shows that when there is uncertainty about the persistence of inflation, it is better to implement monetary policy that is aggressive than gradual.
Return to text


Discurso 25
==================================================
November 08, 2023
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At "A Look at the Past, Present, and Future," a conference celebrating the Centennial of the Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C.
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Stacey, for the chance to be part of this celebration. It is great to be here to honor the Division of Research and Statistics (R&S) and humbling to see so many Fed people who served the institution over long and distinguished careers and have returned for this great occasion. The Fed is one of those places where you can work for a decade or so and still feel like a newbie.
For those listening outside this room, I will briefly outline R&S's responsibilities. A large part of the division, along with other divisions at the Board, is engaged in producing the Tealbook, which contains the staff's forecast for the U.S. economy, as well as a great deal of data and analysis on financial and economic issues, and which is delivered to the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) before our meetings.
Outside of the FOMC meeting cycle, R&S deploys its experts wherever they are needed across the Board, providing crucial inputs to work on financial stability, bank merger analysis, and many other topics. R&S is also an ongoing source of specialized information for policymakers. If Board members have questions about even the most arcane workings of some aspect of the economy, they can send an email and, in no time, be sitting down with some of the best-informed experts on that subject. Much of the time, these are R&S economists. During the pandemic, when questions arose about how the computer chip shortage was affecting auto production or how businesses were responding to the backlog at U.S. ports, R&S gave detailed briefings on these topics. Among its other activities, the Board of Governors is one of the world's most productive economic research institutions, and a large share of that work takes place inside R&S, supporting our mission of promoting a healthy economy and a strong and stable financial system.
I've spoken about research—now let me turn to statistics. In addition to the gathering of data from many sources outside the Federal Reserve, R&S is itself the source for some of the most important data on the economy and the financial system. Our consumer credit data provide financial markets and the public with a vital indicator of the strength of household spending and balance sheets. Each month, the Industrial Production report gives us insights into how well certain sectors of the economy, especially in the manufacturing realm, are operating. R&S is also responsible for the Financial Accounts of the United States, a quarterly compendium of assets, liabilities, and transactions for different segments of the economy. And every three years, R&S conducts the Survey of Consumer Finances, a premier source of detail and insights about how households are faring in the economy. The latest survey was published just last month. These and other data series produced by R&S are a significant public service.
I want to focus in more detail on the forecast, perhaps the most important of R&S's roles. The U.S. economy baseline forecast produced by R&S, along with the simulation of a half-dozen plausible alternative paths, constitutes the largest part of the essential bedrock that enables our pursuit of our dual-mandate goals.
Some people are attracted to extremely challenging tasks. The people of R&S are those people, having chosen such a task in forecasting the path of the U.S. economy, eight times a year for FOMC meetings, with ongoing updates between meetings. They do this work on the biggest stage and with the highest stakes, knowing that the economy very often surprises us.
Several qualities are required to do this work well.
I will start with an intense commitment. The work requires everything you have to give. You have to love this work to do it well.
The job also requires integrity—policymakers count on R&S to give us their best thinking, not shading the results for any reason.
Regular forecasting also demands a systematic approach and a high degree of intellectual rigor. Ask Stacey and her colleagues to explain a certain aspect of the forecast, and you will find that they have a clear explanation grounded in a rigorous framework.
That intellectual rigor has to be combined with flexibility and agility. Economic models can do a reasonably good job of capturing the working of the economy over past decades. Of course, even with state-of-the-art models and even in relatively calm times, the economy frequently surprises us. But our economy is flexible and dynamic, and subject at times to unpredictable shocks, such as a global financial crisis or a pandemic. At those times, forecasters have to think outside the models.
This work also takes large doses of courage and humility. And, finally, judgment. To complement this rigorous process, there has to be good judgment, based on knowledge and experience.
Perhaps the most important legacy of the past century for the Division of Research and Statistics is the resilience, the creativity, the energy, the rigor, and the commitment with which R&S has risen to the many challenges it and our country have faced in that span of history. On behalf of the Board and the FOMC, thank you for that, and hearty congratulations on your first 100 years of service to the public.


Discurso 26
==================================================
October 25, 2023
Introductory Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the 2023 Daniel Patrick Moynihan Lecture on Social Science and Public Policy, hosted by the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Washington, D.C.
Share
I am delighted and honored to introduce Professor Alan Blinder as this year's winner of the Daniel Patrick Moynihan Prize.
The Moynihan Prize honors those who "champion the use of informed judgment to advance the public good."
1
In the field of economics, I can think of no better example of such a champion than Alan Blinder. The very heart of his distinguished career has been advancing the use of informed judgment in economic policymaking.
As Alan has observed, in our political economy, there exist two neighboring tribes, sharing common interests but separated by cultural and language barriers. On one side of the border there is the academy, particularly social scientists, who work to assess the costs and benefits of public policies, actual and possible. On the other side are the policymakers, including elected officials as well as those who work at various government agencies. Folks on the academy side generally feel that the policymakers would make better policy if they paid more attention to academic work. Meanwhile, policymakers often look across that divide desiring that academic work pay more attention to the practical realities of policymaking.
Like Moynihan himself, Alan Blinder is that rare person who both transcends this barrier and recognizes its significance. As he made clear to the Senate during his confirmation process to become Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve, "Academic economists are often aloof from practical policy debates; but I have not been."
2
And he has regularly called on his academic colleagues to "train their powerful tools on real-world issues instead of chasing intellectual will-o'-the-wisps."
3
Alan's academic work is a testimony to those principles. He has used the powerful tools of economics to address the critical policy topics of our time. From his pathbreaking work on the great stagflation of the 1970s,
4
through his analysis of central bank structure, independence, and communications,
5
to his research on financial crises
6
and his masterful summary of the past 60 years of monetary and fiscal policy,
7
Alan's work is always policy relevant, rigorous, and crystal clear.
Alan has also been a top monetary policymaker, in addition to advising Presidents, Fed Chairs and numerous other officials on both a formal and informal basis. But his work goes beyond his excellence as a member of both the academic and policymaker tribes.
Alan's life's work has featured a continuous effort to foster greater understanding and communication across the divide. To illustrate this, I will close with two broad categories of engagement that have been hallmarks of Alan's career.
The first is Alan's work addressing the academy–policy divide itself. Two of his books, published 30 years apart, show his career-long focus answering this question: How can social science, and particularly economics, support good public policies? First in
Hard Heads, Soft Hearts,
he articulates the problems these groups have in communicating and working with each other. He provides guidance and examples of success and failure while advocating an economic philosophy that combines "profound respect for the virtues of free markets with profound concern for those the market leaves behind."
8
He restated that philosophy more recently in
Advice and Dissent,
in which he catalogs his own experience trying to bridge that gap, outlines what that experience has taught him, and gives additional direction "toward more useful economic advice met by less political dissent."
9
The second category is Alan's engagement with the broader American public. He is the rare public figure who speaks fluently in both English and "Economics," and both audiences rightly consider him a native speaker. A natural teacher, Alan has communicated clearly and accessibly over the years with a wide range of audiences, bringing to bear facts, insights and lessons from history and policymaking. His countless newspaper columns, broadcast interviews and many books do more than clearly explain the economic issues of the day. Through them, Alan has managed to make economics both fascinating and essential to an extraordinarily wide audience. That is doubtless due in part to his habit of serving up the substance with a healthy dose of humor. Whether it is an academic article on the economics of brushing teeth,
10
a dinner talk outlining critical issues for central bankers with the help of Gilbert and Sullivan,
11
or the general wit on display in any of his regular columns, Alan's style enlivens even the most technical and dry topics. Moynihan surely would have approved.
A personal note. Over the span of four decades, and counting, for many policymakers from different sectors of the political forest, and for me personally, Alan Blinder has been a friend, a source of good advice, a supporter, an insightful critic, a role model, and a wise soul. In short, a mensch. His published writings as an academic economist are essential to our work, and beyond count. The same is true of the friendships he has forged. He embodies so much of what many policymakers aspire to in his commitment to hard-headed analysis, tempered by a soft heart, that supports good public policy that benefits all Americans.
Thank you. I am delighted and honored to introduce Professor Alan Blinder of Princeton University, this year's winner of the Daniel Patrick Moynihan Prize.
1. See American Academy of Political and Social Science (2022),
"The Moynihan Prize,"
webpage, paragraph 1.
Return to text
2. See Alan S. Blinder (1994),
"Attachment to Senate Banking Questionnaire,"
in
Nominations of Alan S. Blinder, Steven M.H. Wallman, and Philip N. Diehl, hearing before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
U.S. Senate, May 6, Senate Hearing 103-611, 103 Cong. (Washington: Government Printing Office), p. 54.
Return to text
3. See Alan S. Blinder (1997), "What Central Bankers Could Learn from Academics—and Vice Versa,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 11 (Spring), p. 17.
Return to text
4. See Alan S. Blinder (1979),
Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation
(New York: Academic Press).
Return to text
5. See Alan S. Blinder (1998),
Central Banking in Theory and Practice
(PDF)
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press); Alan Blinder, Charles Goodhart, Philipp Hildebrand, David Lipton, and Charles Wyplosz (2001),
How Do Central Banks Talk?
Geneva Reports on the World Economy 3 (Geneva: International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies); and Alan S. Blinder (2004),
The Quiet Revolution: Central Banking Goes Modern
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press).
Return to text
6. See Alan S. Blinder (2013),
After the Music Stopped: The Financial Crisis, the Response, and the Work Ahead
(New York: Penguin Press).
Return to text
7. See Alan S. Blinder (2022),
A Monetary and Fiscal History of the United States, 1961–2021
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).
Return to text
8. See Alan S. Blinder (1987),
Hard Heads, Soft Hearts: Tough-Minded Economics for a Just Society
(Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company), p. 23.
Return to text
9. Alan S. Blinder (2018),
Advice and Dissent: Why America Suffers When Economics and Politics Collide
(New York: Basic Books), p. 308.
Return to text
10. See Alan S. Blinder (1974), "The Economics of Brushing Teeth,"
Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 82 (July–August), pp. 887–91.
Return to text
11. See Alan S. Blinder (2000),
"Critical Issues for Modern Major Central Bankers," (PDF)
paper presented at "Monetary Policy-Making under Uncertainty," a conference organized by the European Central Bank and the Center for Financial Studies of the University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, December 3, 1999, pp. 64–74.
Return to text


Discurso 27
==================================================
October 19, 2023
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Economic Club of New York Luncheon, New York, New York
Share
Before our discussion, I will take a few minutes to discuss recent economic data and the outlook for monetary policy.
Recent Economic Data
Incoming data over recent months show ongoing progress toward both of our dual mandate goals—maximum employment and stable prices.
Inflation
By the time the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) raised rates in March 2022, it was clear that restoring price stability would require both the unwinding of pandemic-related distortions to supply and demand, and also restrictive monetary policy to cool strong demand and give supply time to catch up. These forces are now working together to bring inflation down.
After peaking at 7.1 percent in June 2022, 12-month headline PCE (personal consumption expenditure) inflation is estimated at 3.5 percent through September.
1
Core PCE inflation, which omits the volatile food and energy components, provides a better indicator of where inflation is heading. Twelve-month core PCE inflation peaked at 5.6 percent in February 2022 and is estimated at 3.7 percent through September.
Inflation readings turned lower over the summer, a very favorable development. The September inflation data continued the downward trend but were somewhat less encouraging. Shorter-term measures of core inflation over the most recent three and six months are now running below 3 percent. But these shorter-term measures are often volatile. In any case, inflation is still too high, and a few months of good data are only the beginning of what it will take to build confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our goal. We cannot yet know how long these lower readings will persist, or where inflation will settle over coming quarters. While the path is likely to be bumpy and take some time, my colleagues and I are united in our commitment to bringing inflation down sustainably to 2 percent.
The labor market
In the labor market, strong job creation has met a welcome increase in the supply of workers, due to both higher participation and a rebound of immigration to pre-pandemic levels.
2
Many indicators suggest that, while conditions remain tight, the labor market is gradually cooling. Job openings have moved well down from their highs and are now only modestly above pre-pandemic levels. Quits are back to pre-pandemic levels, and the same is true of the wage premium earned by those who change jobs.
3
Surveys of workers and employers show a return to pre-pandemic levels of tightness.
4
And indicators of wage growth show a gradual decline toward levels that would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time.
5
Growth
To date, declining inflation has not come at the cost of meaningfully higher unemployment—a highly welcome development, but a historically unusual one. Healing of supply chains in conjunction with the rebalancing of demand and supply in the labor market has allowed disinflation without substantially weaker economic activity. Indeed, economic growth has consistently surprised to the upside this year, as most recently seen in the strong retail sales data released earlier this week. Forecasters generally expect gross domestic product to come in very strong for the third quarter before cooling off in the fourth quarter and next year. Still, the record suggests that a sustainable return to our 2 percent inflation goal is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some further softening in labor market conditions.
6
Geopolitical tensions are highly elevated and pose important risks to global economic activity. Our institutional role at the Federal Reserve is to monitor these developments for their economic implications, which remain highly uncertain. Speaking for myself, I found the attack on Israel horrifying, as is the prospect for more loss of innocent lives.
Monetary Policy
Turning to monetary policy, the FOMC has tightened policy substantially over the past 18 months, increasing the federal funds rate by 525 basis points at a historically fast pace and decreasing our securities holdings by roughly $1 trillion. The stance of policy is restrictive, meaning that tight policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. Given the fast pace of the tightening, there may still be meaningful tightening in the pipeline.
My colleagues and I are committed to achieving a stance of policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation sustainably down to 2 percent over time, and to keeping policy restrictive until we are confident that inflation is on a path to that objective. We are attentive to recent data showing the resilience of economic growth and demand for labor. Additional evidence of persistently above-trend growth, or that tightness in the labor market is no longer easing, could put further progress on inflation at risk and could warrant further tightening of monetary policy.
Along with many other factors, actual and expected changes in the stance of monetary policy affect broader financial conditions, which in turn affect economic activity, employment and inflation. Financial conditions have tightened significantly in recent months, and longer-term bond yields have been an important driving factor in this tightening. We remain attentive to these developments because persistent changes in financial conditions can have implications for the path of monetary policy.
Conclusion
My colleagues and I remain resolute in our commitment to returning inflation to 2 percent over time. A range of uncertainties, both old and new, complicate our task of balancing the risk of tightening monetary policy too much against the risk of tightening too little. Doing too little could allow above-target inflation to become entrenched and ultimately require monetary policy to wring more persistent inflation from the economy at a high cost to employment. Doing too much could also do unnecessary harm to the economy.
Given the uncertainties and risks, and how far we have come, the Committee is proceeding carefully. We will make decisions about the extent of additional policy firming and how long policy will remain restrictive based on the totality of the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks.
Thank you. I look forward to our conversation.
1. Descriptions of PCE inflation include Board staff estimates of the September 2023 values based on available information, including the September 2023 consumer price index and producer price index data. The September 2023 PCE inflation data will be published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on October 27, 2023.
Return to text
2. The labor force participation rate has increased by about one-half percentage point since the end of last year.
Return to text
3. For example, according to the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker, the median wage growth for job switchers is now only slightly higher than that of job stayers. The size of this gap is now similar to what was normal pre-pandemic after being elevated in recent years.
Return to text
4. A measure of job availability drawn from Conference Board data—showing the difference between the share of consumers saying that jobs are plentiful and the share saying that jobs are hard to get—was elevated in 2021–22 but is now below its 2019 average. In data from the National Federation of Independent Businesses, the share of small business owners reporting difficulty filling job openings has likewise declined considerably in the last two years and is now only slightly above its 2019 average.
Return to text
5. One recent indicator, average hourly earnings, grew 0.2 percent in September, resulting in an annualized 3-month growth rate of 3.4 percent and a 12-month growth rate of 4.2 percent. By comparison, 12-month average hourly earnings growth peaked at 5.9 percent in early 2022.
Return to text
6. For example, the October Blue Chip consensus estimate for annualized real gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the third quarter is 3.5 percent. Some projections anticipate even stronger growth, such as GDPNow, which currently anticipates 5.4 percent annualized growth in the third quarter, additional information is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's website at
https://www.atlantafed.org/cqer/research/gdpnow
. The Bureau of Economic Analysis will release its advance estimate of third quarter real GDP on October 26.
Return to text
Related Content
On-demand video


Discurso 28
==================================================
October 19, 2023
Opening Remarks
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At the 18th Central Bank Conference on the Microstructure of Financial Markets, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C.
Share
It is my pleasure to welcome you to the 18th Central Bank Conference on the Microstructure of Financial Markets. This is the first time that this event has been held at the Federal Reserve Board, and we are very pleased to host the conference.
Before I begin, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.
Our guests include academics from a number of institutions, both in the U.S. and abroad; fellow central bankers, including colleagues from the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, and the Bank for International Settlements; and friends from across the Federal Reserve System and from several U.S. government agencies, such as the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the U.S. Treasury, including the Office of Financial Research (OFR).
Now, since this is what you have gathered here to discuss, I do not have to convince this group of the critical importance of well-functioning financial markets for the economy. In my case, coming as a macroeconomist from the academic world to the Federal Reserve has only reinforced that conviction.
Market Microstructure Is Important
Central bankers, regulators, and market participants ask a lot of financial markets. We want financial markets to be effective and efficient, and to aggregate and reflect all pertinent information. We rely on these markets to help us gauge how the economy is performing, to help us measure market expectations of monetary policy, and even to help us predict how the economy might evolve in the future. We want financial markets to be deep and liquid in good times, but also to remain deep and resilient when the economy is stressed. We want financial markets to be fair, so as not to favor certain participants. And central bankers, obviously, rely critically on financial markets for the implementation and transmission of monetary policy. As we have broadened our arsenal of policy tools over the past two decades and as markets have become larger, more complex, and more diverse, I would argue that it has become even more critical for us to understand in detail how financial markets operate.
Effective and efficient financial markets do not happen automatically. The precise structure of each financial market, its trading rules, the mix of market participants and the constraints they face, how and how fast information is transmitted, all part of the microstructure of that market, do make an important difference. I think that fact has now become more widely recognized by economists. But it was not the case just a couple of decades ago, when most macroeconomists almost routinely assumed in their models that financial markets would function perfectly in the background. I believe that has changed—witness, for instance, the growth of macrofinance in recent years—and that change has certainly been an improvement.
A Few Words about the Program and Interagency Work
Now, let me say a few words about the first financial market this conference will focus on, the market for U.S. Treasury securities. The U.S. Treasury market clearly remains the largest and deepest government securities market in the world. But it has changed a lot. To quote a recent speech by our former Fed colleague Nellie Liang, who is now the Under Secretary for Domestic Finance at the Treasury, "The market has changed significantly over time, with changes in technology, participants, and regulations, and Treasury debt outstanding has grown substantially."
1
Some episodes of stress in the Treasury market, including a flash event in 2014 and, more recently, the Treasury repo market disruptions of September 2019 and the so-called dash-for-cash episode in 2020, have focused the attention of researchers and U.S. government agencies on the plumbing of the market and on the composition and behavior of its participants. For example, an interagency working group, composed of staff from the U.S Treasury, the SEC, the CFTC, the New York Fed, and the Board of Governors—several members of the group are here—has been studying a broad range of ideas to enhance the resilience of the market. The U.S. Treasury has also spearheaded initiatives to enhance data transparency. And the SEC has sought comments on several proposals that could materially alter the structure of the market.
The Federal Reserve does not regulate markets, but we obviously have a special interest in the Treasury market, in part because some of our policy tools operate through that market and because of how important Treasury market functioning is to financial stability. And the recent discussions on the Treasury market have involved a lot on market microstructure and market design, including questions such as the following:
Is the current intermediation capacity of dealers sufficient given the size of the market?
Would an increase in the share of transactions that are centrally cleared help that intermediation capacity?
Is a decentralized dealer-intermediated market optimal, or could an all-to-all market for Treasury securities be more resilient under stress?
What are the respective roles of banks and nonbanks in this market?
Are the incentives faced by market participants naturally leading the Treasury market to become more resilient over time? Or would some carefully crafted intervention be helpful?
As you can hear, this list of research questions contains a heavy dose of market microstructure content. Why am I sharing them with you? Just to make my final point: As economists focused on market microstructure, what you do is important, and what you do is immediately relevant.
So, again, welcome to the Federal Reserve Board. I wish you an excellent conference.
1. See Nellie Liang (2022), "
Remarks by Under Secretary for Domestic Finance Nellie Liang at the 2022 Treasury Market Conference
," remarks, November 16.
Return to text


Discurso 29
==================================================
October 09, 2023
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Transmission
Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson
At "Beyond the Business Cycle: Adapting to a New Global Paradigm" 65th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Dallas, Texas
Share
Watch Live
Introduction
Thank you for inviting me to join this conference and for the kind introduction.
It is a pleasure to be here.
Before I begin, let me remind you that the views I will express today are my own and are not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.
I will take this opportunity to share with you my outlook on the U.S. economy. I will also discuss risks facing the economy. Then, I will turn to the transmission of monetary policy, including some recent evidence on a source of lagged effects of policy. Finally, I will discuss considerations for monetary policy that follow from efforts to manage risks given the lagged effects of monetary policy. These considerations include the need to proceed carefully as the risks of tightening monetary policy too much relative to those of not tightening enough move closer into balance. With that, let me turn to my outlook for the U.S. economy.
1
2
The Inflation Outlook
Even though recent inflation data have been encouraging, inflation remains too high. Over the 12 months ending in August, total Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) prices rose 3.5 percent, the black line in
figure 1
. Excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 3.9 percent, the red line. To better understand core inflation trends, I find it useful to look at three large categories that together make up the core PCE price index, because what has been causing inflation in each of these sectors is somewhat different. The first category, core goods inflation, the red line in
figure 2
, has slowed strikingly, as supply chain–related price pressures continue to ease. The second category, housing services price inflation, the black line, has clearly stepped down, as was anticipated given the previous slowing of increases in rents for new tenants. In contrast, price increases for the third category, core nonhousing services, the blue line, have yet to show a significant slowdown. Since this segment accounts for more than 50 percent of the overall core PCE index, we will need to see further slowing in this area to meet our inflation objective. Nevertheless, I believe that core PCE prices will moderate further as the labor market comes into better balance.
The Labor Market
Despite the strong September labor market data we received last week, there is evidence that the imbalance between labor demand and labor supply continues to narrow, as labor demand cools while labor supply improves. Even so, the labor market remains tight.
Consistent with cooling labor demand, job openings declined by nearly 1 million from the end of January to the end of August. Nevertheless, as shown in
figure 3
, job openings remain about 30 percent above their pre-pandemic level. At the same time, layoffs have remained very low, and the pace of payroll employment gains remains strong, with September nonfarm payroll job gains coming in higher than expected. In addition, the unemployment rate is 3.8 percent, a level that is still near historical lows. The fact that the unemployment rate and layoffs have remained low over the past year amid disinflation suggests that there is a path to restoring price stability without the kind of substantial increase in unemployment that has often accompanied significant tightening cycles.
Improvements in labor supply are also contributing to rebalancing the labor market. For instance, since the start of the year, the prime-age labor force participation rate, shown in
figure 4
, has moved up further. Immigration has also picked up, further contributing to the increase in labor supply. Slowing labor demand and improving labor supply have eased pressure in the labor market, and my expectation is for further gradual easing in labor market conditions, as restrictive monetary policy continues to slow labor demand without causing an abrupt increase in layoffs or the unemployment rate.
Aggregate Economic Activity
Data we have received so far point to solid economic growth in the third quarter, contrary to expectations earlier this year that the economy would slow. Consumer spending was strong in both July and August. Housing starts, shown in
figure 5
, are rebounding after a slowdown that was widely seen as caused by higher interest rates. Despite the signs of resilience in the economy this year, some analysts expected slower economic growth this fall, which leads me to the next topic: What are some near-term risks facing the U.S. economy?
Risks Facing the U.S. Economy
So far, the economy has been resilient, and inflation has been subsiding; however, I attach a high degree of uncertainty to my outlook and see multiple risks. I am particularly attentive to upside risks to inflation, such as those associated with the economy and labor market remaining too strong to achieve further disinflation, as well as risks associated with unexpected increases in energy prices. Since energy prices are volatile, I tend to look through changes in energy prices and focus more on core inflation in my deliberations. I am mindful that persistent inflation above the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent target increases the risk that inflationary expectations become unanchored. Thus, regardless of its source, my objective is to return inflation to the FOMC's 2 percent target.
I just mentioned upside risks to inflation, but there are also important downside risks to economic activity, such as the slowdown in foreign economic growth. China's economy appears to have lost momentum as real estate activity has fallen, and other indicators, including retail sales, also suggest softness in economic activity. In Europe, manufacturing and services purchasing managers indexes were both in contractionary territory recently. I am following these developments to the extent that they may have implications for the U.S. economy, especially if conditions deteriorate sharply abroad.
On the Transmission of Monetary Policy
As you know, monetary policy is transmitted to the rest of the economy by affecting broad financial conditions, including market interest rates. Higher market rates raise the interest rates that households and businesses face and reduce the spending they undertake—most notably, spending on business fixed investment, residential construction, and consumer durables. Higher interest rates also affect asset prices. For example, higher interest rates, all else being equal, raise the exchange value of the dollar, which then boosts imports and reduces exports. Additionally, higher interest rates, along with a higher anticipated path of policy, lead investors to discount cash flows associated with longer-term investments at higher rates. This reduces the value of the stock market, which then reduces consumption through wealth effects and business investment through the cost of capital. In addition, monetary policy affects risk premiums.
1
Tighter monetary policy tends to reduce the willingness of investors to bear risk, increasing yield spreads and reducing the prices for a range of asset classes and augmenting the direct effects on interest rates and asset prices described earlier.
Figure 6
illustrates how long-term interest rates move in anticipation of changes in the federal funds rate. The red line is the average long-term triple-B corporate bond rate, a measure of corporate borrowing costs. The blue line is the average 30-year mortgage rate, a measure of household borrowing costs. Notice that both measures increased in early 2022 in response to Fed communications and in
anticipation
of increases in the effective federal funds rate, the black line. Recently, these long-term rates have increased further. More generally financial conditions have tightened further, and real long-term Treasury yields have risen significantly. More on this later.
In a speech last spring, I noted that we are still learning about the full effect of our policy tightening in this post-pandemic cycle.
2
Thus, I am also mindful of factors that could attenuate or delay the transmission of monetary policy. One such factor is that the bulk of corporate debt issued by large firms has not yet had to be refinanced since the FOMC started to tighten monetary policy in March 2022.
Large businesses rely on corporate bonds and bank loans as sources of debt financing. Corporate bonds tend to be fixed-rate debt, while bank loans tend to be floating-rate debt. As most nonfinancial corporate debt is in the form of corporate bonds that were issued before 2022, the interest rate averaged across all outstanding corporate debt is still low, as shown in
figure 7
. This rate will likely increase next year when a larger fraction of maturing corporate bonds needs to be refinanced. Given that this additional tightening is in train, it may be too soon to say confidently that we've tightened enough to return inflation to our 2 percent target. At the same time, I will be mindful of the additional tightening in train because of our past rate hikes as I consider whether there is a need to tighten policy further in the future. This leads me to my next topic: considerations for monetary policy that follow from my economic outlook and risks to it that I have already mentioned.
Monetary Policy Considerations
After increasing the target range for the federal funds rate by 525 basis points since early 2022, my view is that the FOMC is in a position to proceed carefully in assessing the extent of any additional policy firming that may be necessary. We are in a sensitive period of risk management, where we have to balance the risk of not having tightened enough, against the risk of policy being too restrictive. The balancing of these two risks was a good reason for holding the policy rate constant at our most recent FOMC meeting.
As I mentioned earlier, real long-term Treasury yields have risen recently. In part, the upward movement in real yields may reflect investors' assessment that the underlying momentum of the economy is stronger than previously recognized and, as a result, a restrictive stance of monetary policy may be needed for longer than previously thought in order to return inflation to 2 percent. But I am also mindful that increases in real yields can arise from changes in investor's attitudes toward risk and uncertainty. Looking ahead, I will remain cognizant of the tightening in financial conditions through higher bond yields and will keep that in mind as I assess the future path of policy. I will be taking financial market developments into account along with the totality of incoming data in assessing the economic outlook and the risks surrounding the outlook and in judging the appropriate future course of policy.
Thank you!
References
Bernanke, Ben S., and Kenneth N. Kuttner (2005). "What Explains the Stock Market's Reaction to Federal Reserve Policy?"
Journal of Finance,
vol. 60 (June), pp. 1221–57.
Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane (1999). "By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,"
Journal of Political Economy
,
vol. 107 (April), pp. 205–51.
Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi (2015). "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
,
vol. 7 (January), pp. 44–76.
Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein (2015). "Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates,"
Journal of Financial Economics
,
vol. 115 (March), pp. 429–48.
Jefferson, Philip N. (2023). "
Implementation and Transmission of Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the H. Parker Willis Lecture, Washington and Lee University, Lexington, Va., March 27.
Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider (2006). "
Equilibrium Yield Curves (PDF)
," NBER Working Paper Series 12609. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October (revised January 2007).
1. Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Hanson and Stein (2015), and Gertler and Karadi (2015), among others, highlight that monetary policy affects risk premiums. Policy tightening tends to reduce the willingness of investors to bear risk—for example, by reducing expected levels of consumption (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). If policy tightens in response to inflationary shocks, term premiums also tend to rise as longer-maturity bonds become riskier (Piazzesi and Schneider, 2006). Policy tightening can also lower stock prices by increasing the expected equity premium—for example, by weakening the balance sheet of leverage firms and making their stocks riskier.
Return to text
2. See Jefferson (2023).
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 30
==================================================
September 28, 2023
Welcoming Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At Conversation with the Chair: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting, Washington, D.C. (and by webcast)
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Thank you, Sarah, thank you to those in Fed Education who helped put together this event, and thank you to the teachers here and online who have put aside some of their planning time to listen and, I hope, also participate. If I were doing the grading, credit would always be granted for participation.
We have scheduled this discussion with teachers well into the school year, partly to highlight the beginning, on October 1, of Economic Education Month. At the Fed, every month is Economic Education Month, and we are glad to join in the celebration.
It is, fortunately, a very different time for teachers than the one we faced in August 2021, the last time we held this discussion with educators. In the crisis of the pandemic, teachers were on the front lines. I know how overwhelming this challenge was for many of you, and the extent of your sacrifice, for which I thank you.
And the crisis in many ways continues, as research confirms the educational deficits that students still suffer from the pandemic. In addition to the challenges they face, there are likely to be consequences for the economy and for society, in a generation of young people who may lack some of what they need to be well-informed and engaged participants in our economy and our democracy. Addressing this legacy of the pandemic is a major public policy challenge, so now more than ever, teachers are crucial to America's future.
A large majority of you are economic educators, a role that is of particular importance. As many of you know, the Fed's ability to influence the economy depends to some extent on influencing the public's view of current and future economic conditions. When my colleagues and I publish our projections for the most likely path for the economy and interest rates, as we did a couple of weeks ago, one of our goals is to influence spending and investment decisions today and in the months ahead. That will only be the case if people understand what we are saying and what it means for their own finances.
That's where you come in. By educating students about economics, not only are you providing them with valuable skills to manage their finances, and to improve their chances for future success in any number of occupations that draw on economic thinking. You are also giving them the knowledge that they need to understand the macroeconomy, including the implications of decisions that the Fed makes. Economic educators impart knowledge that is instrumental in how the Federal Reserve promotes a healthy economy. In a way, when you are teaching students, you are also conducting monetary policy.
But you do a lot more than that. Teachers illuminate the world for us. They help us to see the limitless possibilities in life, and as much as that, also in ourselves. At a wonderful but also very vulnerable time in each of our lives, teachers like you are there to help us understand the world, especially when it is hard to understand. I will leave you with one of the many examples I could cite from my time in school. I can clearly recall one November day, in fifth grade, at Blessed Sacrament School here in Washington, D.C. My teacher Mrs. Keller was called away from class. I adored Mrs. Keller, and when she returned to the room, I think every student was as upset as I was to see her tear-streaked face. And then we got the news—President John F. Kennedy had been shot and killed in Dallas. This was something that was very hard for my classmates and me to understand, but Mrs. Keller pulled herself together and convinced us that, somehow, everything was going to be all right. Teachers are there for all of us, when we need your knowledge, your example, your encouragement, and your care. Thank you for playing the indispensable role you do in our lives, and in our children's lives. And now, I would be very happy to respond to your questions.
Related Content
Conversation with the Chair: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting


Discurso 31
==================================================
September 28, 2023
Welcoming Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At Conversation with the Chair: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting, Washington, D.C. (and by webcast)
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Thank you, Sarah, thank you to those in Fed Education who helped put together this event, and thank you to the teachers here and online who have put aside some of their planning time to listen and, I hope, also participate. If I were doing the grading, credit would always be granted for participation.
We have scheduled this discussion with teachers well into the school year, partly to highlight the beginning, on October 1, of Economic Education Month. At the Fed, every month is Economic Education Month, and we are glad to join in the celebration.
It is, fortunately, a very different time for teachers than the one we faced in August 2021, the last time we held this discussion with educators. In the crisis of the pandemic, teachers were on the front lines. I know how overwhelming this challenge was for many of you, and the extent of your sacrifice, for which I thank you.
And the crisis in many ways continues, as research confirms the educational deficits that students still suffer from the pandemic. In addition to the challenges they face, there are likely to be consequences for the economy and for society, in a generation of young people who may lack some of what they need to be well-informed and engaged participants in our economy and our democracy. Addressing this legacy of the pandemic is a major public policy challenge, so now more than ever, teachers are crucial to America's future.
A large majority of you are economic educators, a role that is of particular importance. As many of you know, the Fed's ability to influence the economy depends to some extent on influencing the public's view of current and future economic conditions. When my colleagues and I publish our projections for the most likely path for the economy and interest rates, as we did a couple of weeks ago, one of our goals is to influence spending and investment decisions today and in the months ahead. That will only be the case if people understand what we are saying and what it means for their own finances.
That's where you come in. By educating students about economics, not only are you providing them with valuable skills to manage their finances, and to improve their chances for future success in any number of occupations that draw on economic thinking. You are also giving them the knowledge that they need to understand the macroeconomy, including the implications of decisions that the Fed makes. Economic educators impart knowledge that is instrumental in how the Federal Reserve promotes a healthy economy. In a way, when you are teaching students, you are also conducting monetary policy.
But you do a lot more than that. Teachers illuminate the world for us. They help us to see the limitless possibilities in life, and as much as that, also in ourselves. At a wonderful but also very vulnerable time in each of our lives, teachers like you are there to help us understand the world, especially when it is hard to understand. I will leave you with one of the many examples I could cite from my time in school. I can clearly recall one November day, in fifth grade, at Blessed Sacrament School here in Washington, D.C. My teacher Mrs. Keller was called away from class. I adored Mrs. Keller, and when she returned to the room, I think every student was as upset as I was to see her tear-streaked face. And then we got the news—President John F. Kennedy had been shot and killed in Dallas. This was something that was very hard for my classmates and me to understand, but Mrs. Keller pulled herself together and convinced us that, somehow, everything was going to be all right. Teachers are there for all of us, when we need your knowledge, your example, your encouragement, and your care. Thank you for playing the indispensable role you do in our lives, and in our children's lives. And now, I would be very happy to respond to your questions.
Related Content
Conversation with the Chair: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting


Discurso 32
==================================================
August 25, 2023
Inflation:  Progress and the Path Ahead
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At “Structural Shifts in the Global Economy,” an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming
Share
Watch Live
Good morning. At last year's Jackson Hole symposium, I delivered a brief, direct message. My remarks this year will be a bit longer, but the message is the same: It is the Fed's job to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal, and we will do so. We have tightened policy significantly over the past year. Although inflation has moved down from its peak—a welcome development—it remains too high. We are prepared to raise rates further if appropriate, and intend to hold policy at a restrictive level until we are confident that inflation is moving sustainably down toward our objective.
Today I will review our progress so far and discuss the outlook and the uncertainties we face as we pursue our dual mandate goals. I will conclude with a summary of what this means for policy. Given how far we have come, at upcoming meetings we are in a position to proceed carefully as we assess the incoming data and the evolving outlook and risks.
The Decline in Inflation So Far
The ongoing episode of high inflation initially emerged from a collision between very strong demand and pandemic-constrained supply. By the time the Federal Open Market Committee raised the policy rate in March 2022, it was clear that bringing down inflation would depend on both the unwinding of the unprecedented pandemic-related demand and supply distortions and on our tightening of monetary policy, which would slow the growth of aggregate demand, allowing supply time to catch up. While these two forces are now working together to bring down inflation, the process still has a long way to go, even with the more favorable recent readings.
On a 12-month basis, U.S. total, or "headline," PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation peaked at 7 percent in June 2022 and declined to 3.3 percent as of July, following a trajectory roughly in line with global trends (
figure 1, panel A
).
1
The effects of Russia's war against Ukraine have been a primary driver of the changes in headline inflation around the world since early 2022. Headline inflation is what households and businesses experience most directly, so this decline is very good news. But food and energy prices are influenced by global factors that remain volatile, and can provide a misleading signal of where inflation is headed. In my remaining comments, I will focus on core PCE inflation, which omits the food and energy components.
On a 12-month basis, core PCE inflation peaked at 5.4 percent in February 2022 and declined gradually to 4.3 percent in July (figure 1, panel B). The lower monthly readings for core inflation in June and July were welcome, but two months of good data are only the beginning of what it will take to build confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our goal. We can't yet know the extent to which these lower readings will continue or where underlying inflation will settle over coming quarters. Twelve-month core inflation is still elevated, and there is substantial further ground to cover to get back to price stability.
To understand the factors that will likely drive further progress, it is useful to separately examine the three broad components of core PCE inflation—inflation for goods, for housing services, and for all other services, sometimes referred to as nonhousing services (
figure 2
).
Core goods inflation has fallen sharply, particularly for durable goods, as both tighter monetary policy and the slow unwinding of supply and demand dislocations are bringing it down. The motor vehicle sector provides a good illustration. Earlier in the pandemic, demand for vehicles rose sharply, supported by low interest rates, fiscal transfers, curtailed spending on in-person services, and shifts in preference away from using public transportation and from living in cities. But because of a shortage of semiconductors, vehicle supply actually fell. Vehicle prices spiked, and a large pool of pent-up demand emerged. As the pandemic and its effects have waned, production and inventories have grown, and supply has improved. At the same time, higher interest rates have weighed on demand. Interest rates on auto loans have nearly doubled since early last year, and customers report feeling the effect of higher rates on affordability.
2
On net, motor vehicle inflation has declined sharply because of the combined effects of these supply and demand factors.
Similar dynamics are playing out for core goods inflation overall. As they do, the effects of monetary restraint should show through more fully over time. Core goods prices fell the past two months, but on a 12-month basis, core goods inflation remains well above its pre-pandemic level. Sustained progress is needed, and restrictive monetary policy is called for to achieve that progress.
In the highly interest-sensitive housing sector, the effects of monetary policy became apparent soon after liftoff. Mortgage rates doubled over the course of 2022, causing housing starts and sales to fall and house price growth to plummet. Growth in market rents soon peaked and then steadily declined (
figure 3
).
3
Measured housing services inflation lagged these changes, as is typical, but has recently begun to fall. This inflation metric reflects rents paid by all tenants, as well as estimates of the equivalent rents that could be earned from homes that are owner occupied.
4
Because leases turn over slowly, it takes time for a decline in market rent growth to work its way into the overall inflation measure. The market rent slowdown has only recently begun to show through to that measure. The slowing growth in rents for new leases over roughly the past year can be thought of as "in the pipeline" and will affect measured housing services inflation over the coming year. Going forward, if market rent growth settles near pre-pandemic levels, housing services inflation should decline toward its pre-pandemic level as well. We will continue to watch the market rent data closely for a signal of the upside and downside risks to housing services inflation.
The final category, nonhousing services, accounts for over half of the core PCE index and includes a broad range of services, such as health care, food services, transportation, and accommodations. Twelve-month inflation in this sector has moved sideways since liftoff. Inflation measured over the past three and six months has declined, however, which is encouraging. Part of the reason for the modest decline of nonhousing services inflation so far is that many of these services were less affected by global supply chain bottlenecks and are generally thought to be less interest sensitive than other sectors such as housing or durable goods. Production of these services is also relatively labor intensive, and the labor market remains tight. Given the size of this sector, some further progress here will be essential to restoring price stability. Over time, restrictive monetary policy will help bring aggregate supply and demand back into better balance, reducing inflationary pressures in this key sector.
The Outlook
Turning to the outlook, although further unwinding of pandemic-related distortions should continue to put some downward pressure on inflation, restrictive monetary policy will likely play an increasingly important role. Getting inflation sustainably back down to 2 percent is expected to require a period of below-trend economic growth as well as some softening in labor market conditions.
Economic growth
Restrictive monetary policy has tightened financial conditions, supporting the expectation of below-trend growth.
5
Since last year's symposium, the two-year real yield is up about 250 basis points, and longer-term real yields are higher as well—by nearly 150 basis points.
6
Beyond changes in interest rates, bank lending standards have tightened, and loan growth has slowed sharply.
7
Such a tightening of broad financial conditions typically contributes to a slowing in the growth of economic activity, and there is evidence of that in this cycle as well. For example, growth in industrial production has slowed, and the amount spent on residential investment has declined in each of the past five quarters (
figure 4
).
But we are attentive to signs that the economy may not be cooling as expected. So far this year, GDP (gross domestic product) growth has come in above expectations and above its longer-run trend, and recent readings on consumer spending have been especially robust. In addition, after decelerating sharply over the past 18 months, the housing sector is showing signs of picking back up. Additional evidence of persistently above-trend growth could put further progress on inflation at risk and could warrant further tightening of monetary policy.
The labor market
The rebalancing of the labor market has continued over the past year but remains incomplete. Labor supply has improved, driven by stronger participation among workers aged 25 to 54 and by an increase in immigration back toward pre-pandemic levels. Indeed, the labor force participation rate of women in their prime working years reached an all-time high in June. Demand for labor has moderated as well. Job openings remain high but are trending lower. Payroll job growth has slowed significantly. Total hours worked has been flat over the past six months, and the average workweek has declined to the lower end of its pre-pandemic range, reflecting a gradual normalization in labor market conditions (
figure 5
).
This rebalancing has eased wage pressures. Wage growth across a range of measures continues to slow, albeit gradually (
figure 6
). While nominal wage growth must ultimately slow to a rate that is consistent with 2 percent inflation, what matters for households is real wage growth. Even as nominal wage growth has slowed, real wage growth has been increasing as inflation has fallen.
We expect this labor market rebalancing to continue. Evidence that the tightness in the labor market is no longer easing could also call for a monetary policy response.
Uncertainty and Risk Management along the Path Forward
Two percent is and will remain our inflation target. We are committed to achieving and sustaining a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to that level over time. It is challenging, of course, to know in real time when such a stance has been achieved. There are some challenges that are common to all tightening cycles. For example, real interest rates are now positive and well above mainstream estimates of the neutral policy rate. We see the current stance of policy as restrictive, putting downward pressure on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. But we cannot identify with certainty the neutral rate of interest, and thus there is always uncertainty about the precise level of monetary policy restraint.
That assessment is further complicated by uncertainty about the duration of the lags with which monetary tightening affects economic activity and especially inflation. Since the symposium a year ago, the Committee has raised the policy rate by 300 basis points, including 100 basis points over the past seven months. And we have substantially reduced the size of our securities holdings. The wide range of estimates of these lags suggests that there may be significant further drag in the pipeline.
Beyond these traditional sources of policy uncertainty, the supply and demand dislocations unique to this cycle raise further complications through their effects on inflation and labor market dynamics. For example, so far, job openings have declined substantially without increasing unemployment—a highly welcome but historically unusual result that appears to reflect large excess demand for labor. In addition, there is evidence that inflation has become more responsive to labor market tightness than was the case in recent decades.
8
These changing dynamics may or may not persist, and this uncertainty underscores the need for agile policymaking.
These uncertainties, both old and new, complicate our task of balancing the risk of tightening monetary policy too much against the risk of tightening too little. Doing too little could allow above-target inflation to become entrenched and ultimately require monetary policy to wring more persistent inflation from the economy at a high cost to employment. Doing too much could also do unnecessary harm to the economy.
Conclusion
As is often the case, we are navigating by the stars under cloudy skies. In such circumstances, risk-management considerations are critical. At upcoming meetings, we will assess our progress based on the totality of the data and the evolving outlook and risks. Based on this assessment, we will proceed carefully as we decide whether to tighten further or, instead, to hold the policy rate constant and await further data. Restoring price stability is essential to achieving both sides of our dual mandate. We will need price stability to achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all.
We will keep at it until the job is done.
1. Descriptions of PCE inflation include Board staff estimates of the July 2023 values based on available information, including the July 2023 consumer price index and producer price index data. The July 2023 PCE inflation data will be published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on August 31, 2023.
Return to text
2. For example, 25 percent of respondents to the most recent University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers reported that it is currently a bad time to buy a new vehicle because of higher interest rates and tighter credit conditions, up from only 4 percent of respondents in 2021. For more information, see the preliminary results of the August 2023 survey, available on the University of Michigan's website at
http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu
.
Return to text
3. This slowing in rent growth has likely occurred for a combination of reasons. Some of it likely reflects higher interest rates and the softening in real household income growth over the past couple of years. But the normalization of dislocations due to the pandemic is likely playing a role here as well. For example, the shifts in housing preferences related to working from home likely contributed to the increase in housing demand reflected in the sizable earlier increases in rents. As the price effects of that demand shift played out, the growth rate of rents would naturally decline toward its earlier trend. Finally, multifamily construction is quite high by historical standards, and that supply coming on line has likely also taken some pressure off market rents.
Return to text
4. PCE prices for housing services include both the rents paid by tenants and an imputed rental value for owner-occupied dwellings (measured as the income the homeowner could have received if the house had been rented to a tenant). For additional details, see Bureau of Economic Analysis (2022), "
Rental Income of Persons (PDF)
," in
NIPA Handbook: Concepts and Methods of the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts
(Washington: BEA, December), pp. 12-1–12-15.
Return to text
5. For an example of how tighter financial conditions affect economic activity, see the Federal Reserve Board staff's new index measuring U.S. financial conditions through their effect on the outlook for growth; the index is discussed in Andrea Ajello, Michele Cavallo, Giovanni Favara, William B. Peterman, John W. Schindler IV, and Nitish R. Sinha (2023), "
A New Index to Measure U.S. Financial Conditions
," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 30).
Return to text
6. Changes in real yields cited in this sentence refer to changes in yields on 2- and 10-year Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities.
Return to text
7. In addition, as the policy rate increased, nonbanking lending conditions changed as well. For example, beginning in 2022 and continuing into the first half of this year, net issuance of riskier debt—such as leveraged loans and speculative-grade and unrated corporate bonds—in public credit markets declined.
Return to text
8. The relationship between labor market slack and inflation, often called the Phillips curve relationship, is likely nonlinear, steepening in a tight labor market. If the Phillips curve has steepened in this way, a small change in labor market tightness could result in a more substantial change in inflation. It is difficult to know with precision how steep that relationship is in real time or how it might evolve as labor market tightness changes. For more information on nonlinearities in this relationship, see Christoph E. Boehm and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar (2022), "Convex Supply Curves,"
American Economic Review
, vol. 112 (December), pp. 3941–69; Pierpaolo Benigno and Gauti B. Eggertsson (2023), "
It's Baaack: The Surge in Inflation in the 2020s and the Return of the Non-Linear Phillips Curve (PDF)
," NBER Working Paper Series 31197 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April); and Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, Lu Zhang, and Lars-Alexander Kuehn (2018), "Endogenous Disasters,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 108 (August), pp. 2212–45.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 33
==================================================
June 29, 2023
Financial Stability and Economic Developments
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Banco de Espana Fourth Conference on Financial Stability, Madrid, Spain
Share
Watch Live
Today I will briefly discuss the current economic situation and the stresses that emerged in the U.S. banking system earlier this year. I will then turn to the evolution of the financial system since the Great Recession and conclude with a few general observations. I will highlight how global efforts to boost resilience in the financial sector over the past decade have been an important success. I will also discuss how recent developments have revealed residual vulnerabilities that we are going to address, and the need to be vigilant for emerging risks.
U.S. economic growth slowed significantly last year, and recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a modest pace. Growth in consumer spending has picked up this year, and some indicators in the housing market have turned up recently. At the same time, activity in the housing sector remains far below its peak in early 2022, reflecting the effects of higher mortgage rates. Higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment.
The labor market remains very tight. Over the past three months, payroll job gains have been robust. The unemployment rate has moved up but remains low. There are some signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming into better balance, including higher labor force participation, some easing in nominal wage growth, and declining vacancies. While the jobs-to-workers gap has declined, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers.
Inflation, however, remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. Over the 12 months ending in May, total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices are estimated to have risen 3.9 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices likely rose 4.7 percent. Inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. Nonetheless, inflation pressures continue to run high, and the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go.
Since early last year, we have raised our policy rate by 5 percentage points. We see the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing and investment. It will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation.
The economy is also facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. Tighter credit conditions are a natural result of tighter monetary policy. But the bank stresses that emerged in March may well lead to a further tightening in credit conditions. The extent of these effects remains uncertain.
At our last meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 to 5-1/4 percent while continuing the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. We made this decision in light of the distance we have come in tightening policy, the uncertain lags in monetary policy, and the potential headwinds from credit tightening. As noted in the FOMC's Summary of Economic Projections, a strong majority of Committee participants expect that it will be appropriate to raise interest rates two or more times by the end of the year.
1
When bank stress emerged in March, we acted in concert with other government agencies to address it, enabling the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to resolve two failed banks in a manner that protected all depositors. We also used our liquidity tools to make funding available to banks that might need it. In addition to our discount window, we established a new facility under our emergency lending authorities, the Bank Term Funding Program. Our provision of liquidity through these tools supported the stability of the financial system without restricting the use of our monetary policy tools to firm the stance of policy as part of our efforts to reduce inflation. The banking system remains sound and resilient, deposit flows have stabilized, and strains have eased.
Evolution of the System since the Great Recession
A little more than a decade ago, the Global Financial Crisis required extraordinary interventions by governments around the world. Stabilizing the U.S. financial system required coordinated efforts by all parts of the government, including $700 billion in taxpayer funds to recapitalize banks, a suite of Fed emergency liquidity facilities, as well as government guarantees on bank transaction accounts and money market mutual funds. Despite these efforts, the Great Recession brought misery to countless millions.
As the crisis slowly receded, authorities in the U.S. and around the world implemented a host of reforms. The goal was to build a system that could withstand severe shocks, including unanticipated ones that might arrive from any direction. In other words, a financial system that would be a source of strength during stressful periods.
A key pillar was building resilience in the banking system. This effort was remarkably successful. Over the course of the decade, capital and liquidity at the largest U.S. banks more than doubled. We began a program of rigorous annual stress tests to ensure the banking system was capitalized against severe recessions and financial market turmoil.
The Great Recession also underscored the critical importance of the nonbank sector. Here, too, the authorities have undertaken a number of steps to build resilience, although much remains to be done.
In 2020 the financial system was again tested, facing a truly unprecedented shock as the pandemic brought the global economy to a standstill. Investors scrambled for safety and liquidity during the "dash for cash." Financial markets came under extreme pressure. Ultimately, the authorities had to support financial markets again as part of the extremely forceful monetary and fiscal response to the public health emergency. The banking system, however, was now far more resilient than it had been before the reforms and thus well positioned to absorb the shock.
We cannot take the resilience of the financial system for granted, however. The multiple shocks we have seen over the past year or so—including the extreme volatility in commodity markets following Russia's invasion of Ukraine and, of course, surprisingly high and persistent inflation as well as the associated increase in interest rates—stressed a range of bank and nonbank financial institutions.
Three General Observations Stemming from the Recent Banking Turmoil
Given the efforts to build resilience in the banking system over the past decade and a half, two natural questions are, why did Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) and two other sizable U.S. banks fail this spring, and why did Credit Suisse—a global systemically important bank (G-SIB)—require a government-supported rescue acquisition? We are committed to learning the lessons from the U.S. bank failures for our program of supervision and regulation. I will offer three observations about the events.
The first observation is that it is very difficult to resist the natural human tendency to fight the last war. In 2008 we saw banks come under stress from outsized credit losses and insufficient liquidity. Such losses appeared possible in the early days of the 2020 crisis, although they ultimately did not materialize. In our stress tests, we have considered severe stress scenarios that produced losses on banks' books, including outsized credit losses. But, of course, SVB's vulnerability came not from credit risk, but from excessive interest rate risk exposure and a business model that was vulnerable in ways its management did not fully appreciate, including a heavy reliance on uninsured deposits.
These events suggest a need to strengthen our supervision and regulation of institutions of the size of SVB. I look forward to evaluating proposals for such changes and implementing them where appropriate.
2
Much will depend on getting the specifics right, and we should bear in mind that there are always tradeoffs in any financial regulation. In addition, the U.S. has benefited from its rich, multi-tiered banking ecosystem, and that diversity should be preserved.
The second observation is the value of forthrightly recognizing when a crisis is building and responding decisively. When SVB failed it was clear that a number of standard assumptions, even though they were informed by hard experience, were wrong. Notably, bank runs were no longer a matter of days or weeks—they could now be nearly instantaneous. Fortunately, in concert with other parts of the government, we were able to act decisively to meet the liquidity needs of the banking system, protect depositors, and limit contagion.
The third observation is the value of having the very largest banks be highly resilient. Our regulatory system is much stronger for the substantial additional safeguards we have built around the G-SIBs since the Great Recession. They are subject to capital surcharges, required to be highly liquid, and held to the highest supervisory standards. The events of the past couple of months would have been much more difficult to manage had the largest banks been undercapitalized or illiquid.
Conclusion
The Great Recession was a watershed moment, demonstrating the terrible consequences a fragile financial system can have on people's lives. In response, regulators in the U.S. and around the globe set out to build a much more resilient financial system. And the ensuing experiences of the pandemic and the past few months did much to validate this approach.
The bank runs and failures in 2023, however, were painful reminders that we cannot predict all of the stresses that will inevitably come with time and chance. We therefore must not grow complacent about the financial system's resilience. And building and maintaining that resilience requires collaboration. The system was able to withstand recent shocks because of the efforts by regulators and legislators, including our international counterparts in the globally interconnected financial system.
We will take these lessons on board, and we will keep learning, as we must, because the work of building and maintaining a resilient financial system is never done.
1. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
2. Of course, any rule change will go through the standard rulemaking process, including public notice and comment, and have appropriate phase-in and transition periods.
Return to text


Discurso 34
==================================================
January 19, 2023
Staying the Course to Bring Inflation Down
Vice Chair Lael Brainard
At the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois
Share
Watch Live
Inflation has declined in recent months, which is important for American households, businesses, and consumers. Inflation is high, and it will take time and resolve to get it back down to 2 percent. We are determined to stay the course.
1
Financial conditions have tightened considerably over the last year as the Federal Reserve and foreign central banks have tightened policy. Real yields have risen significantly across the curve over the past year: 2-year yields on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) have risen more than 4-1/2 percentage points to 2.1 percent, and 10-year TIPS yields have risen more than 2-1/4 percentage points to 1.2 percent. Short-term real interest rates have moved into decidedly positive territory.
2
Mortgage rates have doubled.
3
Inflation has been declining over the past several months against a backdrop of moderate growth. Yesterday's industrial production index points to a significant weakening in the manufacturing sector, and the retail sales report points to a further moderation in consumer spending. Looking forward, weaker readings on real income, wealth, and sentiment, along with indicators of spending on services, such as the ISM services index, point to subdued growth in 2023.
4
Real disposable personal income declined, on net, at an annual rate of 4.1 percent in the first three quarters of 2022, suggesting that recent consumption has been supported by running down pandemic savings and greater reliance on credit.
5
In particular, savings among low-income households appear to be lower and to have declined more rapidly than was previously appreciated.
6
The widespread expectation for U.S. growth to be below potential over 2022 and 2023 reflects significant tightening in both fiscal and monetary policy in an environment of broader global tightening. The expiration of previous fiscal stimulus imposed a substantial drag on real U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) growth in 2022, whereas fiscal policy is expected to make a modest contribution over the next few years, in line with its longer-run average.
By contrast, the drag on U.S. growth and employment from monetary policy is likely to increase in 2023 because of transmission lags from the rapid, large swing from accommodation to restraint in 2022. From March to December 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) undertook a large cumulative tightening in the stance of monetary policy by raising the policy rate 4-1/4 percentage points and shrinking the balance sheet. Although financial conditions adjust immediately to reflect expected and actual changes in monetary policy, the full adjustment of output, employment, and inflation occurs with a lag.
7
Given the speed and magnitude of the swing in the stance of monetary policy, the lagged effects of earlier accommodation likely offset some of the initial effects of tightening over the course of 2022, and it is likely that the full effect on demand, employment, and inflation of the cumulative tightening that is in the pipeline still lies ahead. That said, there is uncertainty about the timing and magnitude.
With that in mind, let's turn to the implications for the employment leg of our dual mandate. In contrast to the slowing of output growth, labor markets remained tight throughout 2022, with layoffs remaining below pre-pandemic levels and the unemployment rate ending the year at 3.5 percent, its historical low. Quit rates and the ratio of job postings to job seekers also remain elevated, although they are off their peaks from early in the year.
Recent declines in average weekly hours, temporary-help services, and monthly payrolls growth suggest tentative signs that labor demand is cooling. Employment at temporary-help services firms—a good leading indicator—peaked in July 2022 and has been declining since then, ending the year only slightly above its December 2019 level. Similarly, average weekly hours have declined: After peaking in early 2021 and remaining elevated through May 2022, average weekly hours have declined and now stand at the bottom of the range for this metric over the five years before the pandemic. The continued decline in average weekly hours is notable because this margin is among the easiest to adjust by firms facing declining demand, especially those who may be reluctant to undertake layoffs following the challenges encountered in restoring employment following the pandemic-induced layoffs. In addition, average payrolls growth in the Bureau of Labor Statistics' establishment survey fell from 540,000 jobs per month in the first quarter of 2022 to 250,000 jobs per month in the fourth quarter.
That said, labor supply appears likely to remain constrained. On net, the labor force participation rate flattened out over 2022 at a level that is about 1 percentage point lower than pre-pandemic, primarily reflecting an estimated 2.5 million in excess retirements, as well as some impact from long COVID.
8
Immigration has also been low in recent years.
9
Despite constrained supply, wages do not appear to be driving inflation in a 1970s-style wage–price spiral. It is true that wages have grown faster than the pace consistent with 2 percent inflation and productivity growth. It is also true that wages have grown slower than inflation over the past two years, and that aggregate real wages have fallen. It appears that workers in lower-wage sectors who saw high pandemic layoffs initially and benefited from job switching subsequently as businesses scrambled to hire have seen wage gains in real terms. However, in the aggregate, the gains among lower-wage workers were more than offset by real wage declines among middle- and higher-wage workers in the context of a broader compression in the real wage distribution, as David Autor points out.
10
Overall, the labor share of income has declined over the past two years and appears to be at or below pre-pandemic levels, while corporate profits as a share of GDP remain near postwar highs.
Retail markups in a number of sectors have seen material increases in what could be described as a price–price spiral, whereby final prices have risen by more than the increases in input prices.
11
The compression of these markups as supply constraints ease, inventories rise, and demand cools could contribute to disinflationary pressures.
There are tentative signs that wage growth is moderating. Growth in average hourly earnings has softened recently—stepping down to 4.1 percent annualized growth on a 3-month basis in December from roughly 4.5 percent on a 6-month and 12-month basis. I will be watching to see whether the employment cost index data at the end of this month show the deceleration from the third quarter continuing into the fourth quarter.
Let's now turn to the inflation leg of our dual mandate. Inflation has declined in recent months from very high levels. With the consumer price index and producer price index now available, total PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation in December is likely to have run at around a 2.3 percent annualized pace on a 3- and 6-month basis, as compared with 5.1 percent on a 12-month basis. This deceleration reflects an easing in war-related energy shocks as well as in core goods inflation: Energy and core goods each subtracted nearly three-fourths of 1 percentage point from 3-month annualized total PCE inflation. The declines in energy and core goods are a reversal of previous large increases and are expected to moderate.
Core PCE inflation is running at a 3.1 percent annualized pace on a 3-month basis—below its 3.8 percent reading on a 6-month basis and 4.5 percent on a 12-month basis. Within this, recent declines in core goods inflation reflect a reduction in core import prices, an easing of supply chains, a restocking of inventories, and cooling demand. Core goods prices are likely to flatten out once earlier large gains reverse, in the absence of new shocks, and overall core inflation could move up somewhat for a time as a result.
In that regard, housing services inflation remains stubbornly high at 8.8 percent on a 3-month basis—compared with 7.7 percent on a 12-month basis. Housing services are making an annualized contribution to core PCE that is more than double their contribution before the pandemic. That said, the housing sector is highly interest sensitive, and the most recent reading of one national indicator pointed to house prices having declined 2.5 percent over the five months ending in November.
12
Similarly, rents based on new leases are decelerating sharply.
13
Although it is currently offset by catch-up in renewing leases, the decline in rent on new leases will show through to average rent over time, and declines in housing services inflation are expected by the third quarter of this year.
14
In addition, nonhousing services are running at about 4.4 percent annualized inflation on a 3-month basis, similar to their 12-month pace. There are a range of views on what it will take to bring down this component of inflation to pre-pandemic levels. Since wages constitute a significant fraction of costs for most firms in nonhousing services, one possible channel is through a weakening in labor demand. That said, to the extent that inputs other than wages may have been responsible in part for important price increases for some nonhousing service sectors, an unwinding of these factors could help bring down nonhousing services inflation.
There is some recent evidence that the persistent components of inflation in core goods and nonhousing services, particularly transportation, recreation, and food services and accommodation, have behaved similarly, peaking around early 2022 and steadily declining since then.
15
To the extent that the persistent components of these nonhousing services and core goods reflect common factors that are fading, such as pass-through from commodity and supply chain shocks, they are unlikely to be as cyclically persistent, as long as inflation expectations are well anchored.
16
Of course, an extended period of high goods and services inflation resulting from a series of demand and supply shocks associated with the pandemic and the war could lead to a rise in inflation expectations, which would make it much more difficult to bring inflation down.
17
That is why it has been important for monetary policy to take a risk-management posture to defend the expectations anchor. And the evidence from market- and survey-based measures suggests that longer-term inflation expectations are well anchored, while year-ahead measures have recently declined but remain elevated.
Together, the price trends in core goods and nonhousing services, the tentative indications of some deceleration in wages, the evidence of anchored expectations, and the scope for margin compression may provide some reassurance that we are not currently experiencing a 1970s‑style wage–price spiral. For these reasons, it remains possible that a continued moderation in aggregate demand could facilitate continued easing in the labor market and reduction in inflation without a significant loss of employment.
18
Nonetheless, substantial uncertainty remains. Further shocks associated with the war and the pandemic are possible. While there has been some improvement in the outlook for activity and inflation in Europe, there is uncertainty about the implications of China's exit from zero COVID for global demand and inflation, especially in commodities.
Turning to the implications for policy, my colleagues and I are committed to restoring price stability. The FOMC moved policy into restrictive territory at a rapid pace and subsequently downshifted the pace of increases in the target range at its most recent meeting. This will enable us to assess more data as we move the policy rate closer to a sufficiently restrictive level, taking into account the risks around our dual-mandate goals. In parallel, balance sheet runoff is continuing. Even with the recent moderation, inflation remains high, and policy will need to be sufficiently restrictive for some time to make sure inflation returns to 2 percent on a sustained basis.
1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis for his assistance on these remarks. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. For instance, the expected 3-month T-bill rate is currently 4.7 percent, 1.5 percentage points above the 3‑month 3.2 percent median projection of the 2023:Q1 annualized total PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation rate in the January Blue Chip survey.
Return to text
3. In addition, over the course of the past year, investment- and speculative-grade corporate bond spreads over Treasury securities have widened by roughly 50 basis points and 100 basis points, respectively; broad equity prices have declined by 17 percent; and the trade-weighted dollar has appreciated by about 4 percent on net. The Federal Reserve's broad trade-weighted dollar index is based on 26 currencies of major U.S. trading partners. It is published in Statistical Release H.10, "Foreign Exchange Rates," available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h10/current/default.htm
.
Return to text
4. The Institute for Supply Management's services index fell by 6.9 points to contractionary territory at 49.6 in December, reflecting declines in the subindexes for business activity, new orders, and employment.
Return to text
5. Total credit card balances were $1.19 trillion in November, relative to $1.09 trillion in December 2019, and the share of borrowers with consumer loans in delinquency has rebounded to pre-pandemic levels. For more information on credit card balances, see Statistical Release G.19, "Consumer Credit," available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/current/default.htm
.
Return to text
6. For a recent assessment of savings since the onset of the pandemic and a decomposition of excess savings across income quartiles, see Aditya Aladangady, David Cho, Laura Feiveson, and Eugenio Pinto (2022), "
Excess Savings during the COVID-19 Pandemic
," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 21).
Return to text
7. Romer and Romer (2004) and Gertler and Karadi (2015) find that it takes about 9 and 12 months, respectively, for monetary policy actions to begin to affect inflation and additional time for that effect to peak. In contrast, Bauer and Swanson (2022) find that inflation effects from monetary policy occur much sooner and peak within the first 10 months. See Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer (2004), "A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation and Implications,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 94 (September), pp. 1055–84; Mark Gertler and Peter Karadi (2015), "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
vol. 7 (January), pp. 44–76; and Michael D. Bauer and Eric T. Swanson (2022), "A Reassessment of Monetary Policy Surprises and High-Frequency Identification," in Martin Eichenbaum, Erik Hurst, and Valerie A. Ramey, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2022,
vol. 37 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). In addition, recent research suggests that there may have been an acceleration in the maximum effect on inflation following the broader use of balance sheet and forward-guidance tools in 2009, bringing the arrival of that maximum effect from three years to as little as 12 months, though considerable uncertainty surrounds that estimate. See Taeyoung Doh and Andrew T. Foerster (2022), "
Have Lags in Monetary Policy Transmission Shortened?
" Economic Bulletin (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, December).
Return to text
8. A discussion of the labor market impact of long COVID can be found in Price (2022) and the references within. See Brendan M. Price (2022), "
Long COVID, Cognitive Impairment, and the Stalled Decline in Disability Rates
," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 5).
Return to text
9. By one estimate, the changes in immigration policy since 2016, in combination with the pandemic travel restrictions, reduced the total level of immigration by 3.4 million people over the period from 2016 to 2021. As the authors of this study note, according to the U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey, around 50 percent of immigrants from 2001 to 2020 joined the labor force within a year of their arrival. See Elior Cohen and Samantha Shampine (2022), "
Immigration Shortfall May Be a Headwind for Labor Supply
," Economic Bulletin (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, May).
Return to text
10. See David Autor, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2022), "
The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low Wage
Economy
,"
lecture delivered at
Markus' Academy, Bendheim Center for Finance, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J. (via webcast), December 8.
Return to text
11. Since the pandemic, significant supply and demand imbalances have coincided with large increases in retail trade margins in several sectors, increases that have exceeded the contemporaneous increase in wages paid to the workers in those sectors. For example, since the end of 2019, retail trade margins for food and grocery retailers increased by about 25 percent, outstripping the growth in average hourly earnings for workers in that sector, which was just under 19 percent. A similar gap exists between margin and wage increases for general merchandise retailers, which were 24 percent and 14 percent, respectively.
Return to text
12. The CoreLogic Home Price Index peaked in June 2022 and has declined in each month through November 2022. More information is available at https://www.corelogic.com/intelligence/u-s-home-price-insights-january-2023/.
Return to text
13. The CoreLogic Single-Family Rent Index shows a significant deceleration over the 7 months ending in November, including negative month over month rent growth in September through November; see CoreLogic (2023), "CoreLogic: US Annual Rent Growth Drops for the Seventh Straight Month in November," January 17, https://www.corelogic.com/intelligence/corelogic-us-annual-rent-growth-drops-for-the-seventh-straight-month-in-november/.
Return to text
14. For a recent analysis of the lead–lag relationship between indexes of market rents for new tenants and the indexes of average rent for all tenants, see Brian Adams, Lara Loewenstein, Hugh Montag, and Randal J. Verbrugge (2022), "
Disentangling Rent Index Differences: Data, Methods, and Scope
," Working Paper Series 22-38 (Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, December).
Return to text
15. See Martín Almuzara, Marek Jarocinski, and Argia Sbordone (2023), "
The Layers of Inflation Persistence
," Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
Liberty Street Economics
(blog), January 5.
Return to text
16. And, of course, the reemergence of additional shocks to commodities and intermediate inputs is possible.
Return to text
17. For a discussion of supply shocks and monetary policy in the context of recent events, see Lael Brainard (2022), "
What Can We Learn from the Pandemic and the War about Supply Shocks, Inflation, and Monetary Policy?
" summary of remarks delivered as part of a panel at the Bank for International Settlements Annual Meeting on June 24, Basel, Switzerland.
Return to text
18. For a description of one path to such an outcome, see Andrew Figura and Chris Waller (2022), "
What Does the Beveridge Curve Tell Us about the Likelihood of a Soft Landing?
" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 29).
Return to text


Discurso 35
==================================================
January 10, 2023
Panel on "Central Bank Independence and the Mandate—Evolving Views"
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Symposium on Central Bank Independence, Sveriges Riksbank, Stockholm, Sweden
Share
Watch Live
I will address three main points. First, the Federal Reserve's monetary policy independence is an important and broadly supported institutional arrangement that has served the American public well. Second, the Fed must continuously earn that independence by using our tools to achieve our assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability, and by providing transparency to facilitate understanding and effective oversight by the public and their elected representatives in Congress. Third, we should "stick to our knitting" and not wander off to pursue perceived social benefits that are not tightly linked to our statutory goals and authorities.
Central bank independence and transparency
On the first point, the case for monetary policy independence lies in the benefits of insulating monetary policy decisions from short-term political considerations.
1
Price stability is the bedrock of a healthy economy and provides the public with immeasurable benefits over time. But restoring price stability when inflation is high can require measures that are not popular in the short term as we raise interest rates to slow the economy. The absence of direct political control over our decisions allows us to take these necessary measures without considering short-term political factors. I believe that the benefits of independent monetary policy in the U.S. context are well understood and broadly accepted.
2
In a well-functioning democracy, important public policy decisions should be made, in almost all cases, by the elected branches of government. Grants of independence to agencies should be exceedingly rare, explicit, tightly circumscribed, and limited to those issues that clearly warrant protection from short-term political considerations.
With independence comes the responsibility to provide the transparency that enables effective oversight by Congress, which, in turn, supports the Fed's democratic legitimacy. At the Fed, we treat this as an active, not passive, responsibility, and over the past several decades we have steadily broadened our efforts to provide meaningful transparency about the basis for, and consequences of, the decisions we make in service to the American public. We are tightly focused on achieving our statutory mandate and on providing useful and appropriate transparency.
3
Sticking to our mandate
It is essential that we stick to our statutory goals and authorities, and that we resist the temptation to broaden our scope to address other important social issues of the day.
4
Taking on new goals, however worthy, without a clear statutory mandate would undermine the case for our independence.
In the area of bank regulation, too, the Fed has a degree of independence, as do the other federal bank regulators. Independence in this area helps ensure that the public can be confident that our supervisory decisions are not influenced by political considerations.
5
Today, some analysts ask whether incorporating into bank supervision the perceived risks associated with climate change is appropriate, wise, and consistent with our existing mandates.
Addressing climate change seems likely to require policies that would have significant distributional and other effects on companies, industries, regions, and nations. Decisions about policies to directly address climate change should be made by the elected branches of government and thus reflect the public's will as expressed through elections.
At the same time, in my view, the Fed does have narrow, but important, responsibilities regarding climate-related financial risks. These responsibilities are tightly linked to our responsibilities for bank supervision.
6
The public reasonably expects supervisors to require that banks understand, and appropriately manage, their material risks, including the financial risks of climate change.
But without explicit congressional legislation, it would be inappropriate for us to use our monetary policy or supervisory tools to promote a greener economy or to achieve other climate-based goals.
7
We are not, and will not be, a "climate policymaker."
References
Alesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers (1993). "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2010). "
Central Bank Independence, Transparency, and Accountability
," speech delivered at the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies International Conference, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, Japan, May 25.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022). "
Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Proposed Principles Providing a High-Level Framework for the Safe and Sound Management of Exposures to Climate-Related Financial Risks for Large Banking Organizations
," press release, December 2.
Crowe, Christopher, and Ellen E. Meade (2008). "Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness,"
European Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 24 (December), pp. 763–77.
Debelle, Guy, and Stanley Fischer (1994). "
How Independent Should a Central Bank Be? (PDF)
" in
Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers,
proceedings of a conference held in North Falmouth, Massachusetts, in June 1994. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 195-221.
Rogoff, Kenneth (1985). "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 100 (November), pp. 1169-89.
Tucker, Paul (2018).
Unelected Power: The Quest for Legitimacy in Central Banking and the Regulatory State.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
1. In the past several decades, support for arrangements in which central banks made monetary policy decisions in pursuit of legislated goals of economic and price stability has been buttressed by theoretical and empirical research contributions, including by Kenneth Rogoff, on the benefits of central bank independence. See Rogoff (1985) as well as the discussion below of the distinction between goal independence and instrument independence. With regard to empirical evidence on the matter, see Alesina and Summers (1993) as well as the subsequent research literature of the past three decades, including Crowe and Meade (2008). Bernanke (2010) and Tucker (2018) provide overviews of the development of central bank independence.
Return to text
2. Our situation is different from that of the European Central Bank, whose independence is enumerated in Article 130 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, which is available from the European Union at
https://lexparency.org/eu/TFEU/ART_130
.
Return to text
3. We continue to strive to improve our transparency. Over my five years as Chair, I have pursued this aim by extending postmeeting press conferences to all FOMC meetings and instituting ongoing personal dialogue with legislators. This continuous dialogue goes well beyond the regular testimony, established by statute, in which I report to the congressional committees that have oversight responsibilities regarding monetary policy.
Return to text
4. Although the Federal Reserve has been independent since its inception in 1914, its dual mandate only became part of the law in 1977 (see Bernanke, 2010). The existence of the dual mandate reflects the fact that the Federal Reserve's monetary policy independence corresponds to operational, or instrument, independence, rather than goal independence. See Debelle and Fischer (1994) for an analysis of the distinction between types of independence.
Return to text
5. Like our monetary policy independence, our independence in this area comes with a high level of transparency about our policies and procedures.
Return to text
6. For details, see Board of Governors (2022).
Return to text
7. While U.S. monetary policy has the dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, some other central banks have somewhat more expansive mandates. The Bank of England and the European Central Bank both have a primary mandate to maintain price stability but a secondary mandate to support the economic policies of the U.K. government and the European Union, respectively; see the Bank of England Act 1998, part II(11), available from the U.K. National Archives at
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/11/contents
,
and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Article 127(1), available from the European Union at
https://lexparency.org/eu/TFEU/ART_127
.
Return to text


Discurso 36
==================================================
November 30, 2022
Inflation and the Labor Market
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Share
Watch Live
Today I will offer a progress report on the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) efforts to restore price stability to the U.S. economy for the benefit of the American people. The report must begin by acknowledging the reality that inflation remains far too high. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation is imposing significant hardship, straining budgets and shrinking what paychecks will buy. This is especially painful for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all.
We currently estimate that 12-month personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation through October ran at 6.0 percent (
figure 1
).
1
While October inflation data received so far showed a welcome surprise to the downside, these are a single month's data, which followed upside surprises over the previous two months. As figure 1 makes clear, down months in the data have often been followed by renewed increases. It will take substantially more evidence to give comfort that inflation is actually declining. By any standard, inflation remains much too high.
For purposes of this discussion, I will focus my comments on core PCE inflation, which omits the food and energy inflation components, which have been lower recently but are quite volatile. Our inflation goal is for total inflation, of course, as food and energy prices matter a great deal for household budgets. But core inflation often gives a more accurate indicator of where overall inflation is headed. Twelve-month core PCE inflation stands at 5.0 percent in our October estimate, approximately where it stood last December when policy tightening was in its early stages. Over 2022, core inflation rose a few tenths above 5 percent and fell a few tenths below, but it mainly moved sideways. So when will inflation come down?
I could answer this question by pointing to the inflation forecasts of private-sector forecasters or of FOMC participants, which broadly show a significant decline over the next year. But forecasts have been predicting just such a decline for more than a year, while inflation has moved stubbornly sideways. The truth is that the path ahead for inflation remains highly uncertain. For now, let's put aside the forecasts and look instead to the macroeconomic conditions we think we need to see to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time.
For starters, we need to raise interest rates to a level that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent. There is considerable uncertainty about what rate will be sufficient, although there is no doubt that we have made substantial progress, raising our target range for the federal funds rate by 3.75 percentage points since March. As our last postmeeting statement indicates, we anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate. It seems to me likely that the ultimate level of rates will need to be somewhat higher than thought at the time of the September meeting and Summary of Economic Projections. I will return to policy at the end of my comments, but for now, I will simply say that we have more ground to cover.
We are tightening the stance of policy in order to slow growth in aggregate demand. Slowing demand growth should allow supply to catch up with demand and restore the balance that will yield stable prices over time. Restoring that balance is likely to require a sustained period of below-trend growth.
Last year, the ongoing reopening of the economy boosted real gross domestic product (GDP) growth to a very strong 5.7 percent. This year, GDP was roughly flat through the first three quarters, and indicators point to modest growth this quarter, which seems likely to bring the year in with very modest growth overall. Several factors contributed to this slowing growth, including the waning effects of reopening and of pandemic fiscal support, the global implications of Russia's war against Ukraine, and our policy actions, which tightened financial conditions and are affecting economic activity, particularly in interest-sensitive sectors such as housing. We can say that demand growth has slowed, and we expect that this growth will need to remain at a slower pace for a sustained period.
Despite the tighter policy and slower growth over the past year, we have not seen clear progress on slowing inflation. To assess what it will take to get inflation down, it is useful to break core inflation into three component categories: core goods inflation, housing services inflation, and inflation in core services other than housing (
figure 2
).
Core goods inflation has moved down from very high levels over the course of 2022, while housing services inflation has risen rapidly. Inflation in core services ex housing has fluctuated but shown no clear trend. I will discuss each of these items in turn.
Early in the pandemic, goods prices began rising rapidly, as abnormally strong demand was met by pandemic-hampered supply. Reports from businesses and many indicators suggest that supply chain issues are now easing. Both fuel and nonfuel import prices have fallen in recent months, and indicators of prices paid by manufacturers have moved down. While 12-month core goods inflation remains elevated at 4.6 percent, it has fallen nearly 3 percentage points from earlier in the year. It is far too early to declare goods inflation vanquished, but if current trends continue, goods prices should begin to exert downward pressure on overall inflation in coming months.
Housing services inflation measures the rise in the price of all rents and the rise in the rental-equivalent cost of owner-occupied housing. Unlike goods inflation, housing services inflation has continued to rise and now stands at 7.1 percent over the past 12 months. Housing inflation tends to lag other prices around inflation turning points, however, because of the slow rate at which the stock of rental leases turns over.
2
The market rate on new leases is a timelier indicator of where overall housing inflation will go over the next year or so. Measures of 12-month inflation in new leases rose to nearly 20 percent during the pandemic but have been falling sharply since about midyear (
figure 3
).
As figure 3 shows, however, overall housing services inflation has continued to rise as existing leases turn over and jump in price to catch up with the higher level of rents for new leases. This is likely to continue well into next year. But as long as new lease inflation keeps falling, we would expect housing services inflation to begin falling sometime next year. Indeed, a decline in this inflation underlies most forecasts of declining inflation.
Finally, we come to core services other than housing. This spending category covers a wide range of services from health care and education to haircuts and hospitality. This is the largest of our three categories, constituting more than half of the core PCE index. Thus, this may be the most important category for understanding the future evolution of core inflation. Because wages make up the largest cost in delivering these services, the labor market holds the key to understanding inflation in this category.
In the labor market, demand for workers far exceeds the supply of available workers, and nominal wages have been growing at a pace well above what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time.
3
Thus, another condition we are looking for is the restoration of balance between supply and demand in the labor market.
Signs of elevated labor market tightness emerged suddenly in mid-2021. The unemployment rate at the time was much higher than the 3.5 percent that had prevailed without major signs of tightness before the pandemic. Employment was still millions below its level on the eve of the pandemic. Looking back, we can see that a significant and persistent labor supply shortfall opened up during the pandemic—a shortfall that appears unlikely to fully close anytime soon.
Comparing the current labor force with the Congressional Budget Office's pre-pandemic forecast of labor force growth reveals a current labor force shortfall of roughly 3-1/2 million people (
figure 4, left panel
).
4
This shortfall reflects both lower-than-expected population growth and a lower labor force participation rate (figure 4, right panel). Participation dropped sharply at the onset of the pandemic because of many factors, including sickness, caregiving, and fear of infection. Many forecasters expected that participation would move back up fairly quickly as the pandemic faded. And for workers in their prime working years, it mostly has. Overall participation, however, remains well below pre-pandemic trends.
Some of the participation gap reflects workers who are still out of the labor force because they are sick with COVID-19 or continue to suffer lingering symptoms from previous COVID infections ("long COVID").
5
But recent research by Fed economists finds that the participation gap is now mostly due to excess retirements—that is, retirements in excess of what would have been expected from population aging alone.
6
These excess retirements might now account for more than 2 million of the 3‑1/2 million shortfall in the labor force.
7
What explains these excess retirements? Health issues have surely played a role, as COVID has posed a particularly large threat to the lives and health of the elderly.
8
In addition, many older workers lost their jobs in the early stages of the pandemic, when layoffs were historically high. The cost of finding new employment may have appeared particularly large for these workers, given pandemic-related disruptions to the work environment and health concerns.
9
Also, gains in the stock market and rising house prices in the first two years of the pandemic contributed to an increase in wealth that likely facilitated early retirement for some people.
The data so far do not suggest that excess retirements are likely to unwind because of retirees returning to the labor force. Older workers are still retiring at higher rates, and retirees do not appear to be returning to the labor force in sufficient numbers to meaningfully reduce the total number of excess retirees.
10
The second factor contributing to the labor supply shortfall is slower growth in the working-age population. The combination of a plunge in net immigration and a surge in deaths during the pandemic probably accounts for about 1-1/2 million missing workers.
11
Policies to support labor supply are not the domain of the Fed: Our tools work principally on demand. Without advocating any particular policy, however, I will say that policies to support labor force participation could, over time, bring benefits to the workers who join the labor force and support overall economic growth. Such policies would take time to implement and have their effects, however. For the near term, a moderation of labor demand growth will be required to restore balance to the labor market.
Currently, the unemployment rate is at 3.7 percent, near 50-year lows, and job openings exceed available workers by about 4 million—that is about 1.7 job openings for every person looking for work (
figure 5
). So far, we have seen only tentative signs of moderation of labor demand. With slower GDP growth this year, job gains have stepped down from more than 450,000 per month over the first seven months of the year to about 290,000 per month over the past three months. But this job growth remains far in excess of the pace needed to accommodate population growth over time—about 100,000 per month by many estimates. Job openings have fallen by about 1.5 million this year but remain higher than at any time before the pandemic.
Wage growth, too, shows only tentative signs of returning to balance. Some measures of wage growth have ticked down recently (
figure 6
). But the declines are very modest so far relative to earlier increases and still leave wage growth well above levels consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. To be clear, strong wage growth is a good thing. But for wage growth to be sustainable, it needs to be consistent with 2 percent inflation.
Let's sum up this review of economic conditions that we think we need to see to bring inflation down to 2 percent. Growth in economic activity has slowed to well below its longer-run trend, and this needs to be sustained. Bottlenecks in goods production are easing and goods price inflation appears to be easing as well, and this, too, must continue. Housing services inflation will probably keep rising well into next year, but if inflation on new leases continues to fall, we will likely see housing services inflation begin to fall later next year. Finally, the labor market, which is especially important for inflation in core services ex housing, shows only tentative signs of rebalancing, and wage growth remains well above levels that would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. Despite some promising developments, we have a long way to go in restoring price stability.
Returning to monetary policy, my FOMC colleagues and I are strongly committed to restoring price stability. After our November meeting, we noted that we anticipated that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate in order to attain a policy stance that is sufficiently restrictive to move inflation down to 2 percent over time.
Monetary policy affects the economy and inflation with uncertain lags, and the full effects of our rapid tightening so far are yet to be felt. Thus, it makes sense to moderate the pace of our rate increases as we approach the level of restraint that will be sufficient to bring inflation down. The time for moderating the pace of rate increases may come as soon as the December meeting. Given our progress in tightening policy, the timing of that moderation is far less significant than the questions of how much further we will need to raise rates to control inflation, and the length of time it will be necessary to hold policy at a restrictive level. It is likely that restoring price stability will require holding policy at a restrictive level for some time. History cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. We will stay the course until the job is done.
References
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2022). "
Worker Displacement: 2019–2021 (PDF)
," press release, August 26.
Camarota, Steven A., and Karen Zeigler (2022).
Estimating the Illegal Immigrant Population Using the Current Population Survey
.
Washington: Center for Immigration Studies, March.
Congressional Budget Office (2020).
The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2020 to 2030 (PDF)
.
Washington: CBO, January.
Goda, Gopi Shah, and Evan J. Soltas (2022). "
The Impacts of COVID-19 Illnesses on Workers (PDF)
," NBER Working Paper Series 30435. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September.
Montes, Joshua, Christopher Smith, and Juliana Dajon (2022). " '
The Great Retirement Boom': The Pandemic-Era Surge in Retirements and Implications for Future Labor Force Participation
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-081. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November.
Price, Brendan M. (2022). "
Long COVID, Cognitive Impairment, and the Stalled Decline in Disability Rates
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 5.
Sheiner, Louise, and Nasiha Salwati (2022). "
How Much Is Long COVID Reducing Labor Force Participation? Not Much (So Far) (PDF)
," Hutchins Center
Working Paper 80. Washington: Brookings Institution,
October.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (2022).
CBP Enforcement Statistics: Fiscal Year 2022
.
Washington: CBP, November.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (2022).
Legal Immigration and Adjustment of Status Report: Fiscal Year 2022, Quarter 2
.
Washington: Department of Homeland Security, October.
1. Throughout this discussion, PCE data for October are estimates based on the October consumer price index and producer price index data.
Return to text
2. Rental lease data are also the main input into the measurement of owner-occupied housing prices.
Return to text
3. The pace of wage inflation affects all sectors of the economy, but wages are a particularly large share of costs in core services ex housing and, thus, particularly important for inflation in this category.
Return to text
4. See Congressional Budget Office (2020). To account for the effect of population controls on the level of the labor force, the shortfall is calculated by appending the Congressional Budget Office's January 2020 projected labor force growth over the years 2020–22 onto the level of the labor force in 2019:Q4 that is adjusted for population controls.
Return to text
5. Recent research suggests that long COVID may be keeping 280,000 to 680,000 individuals aged 16 to 64 out of the labor force (Sheiner and Salwati, 2022), and long COVID may explain why the percentage of those aged 18 to 64 not in the labor force due to a disability has stalled over the past two years rather than continuing its pre-pandemic decline (see also Price, 2022).
Return to text
6. See Montes, Smith, and Dajon (2022).
Return to text
7. This analysis adjusts for population controls to the Current Population Survey. This adjustment is important, because while the unadjusted data show a marked decline in the retired share in January 2022, this drop is entirely an artifact of new population controls introduced in January. A proper assessment of the effects of retirements since the start of the pandemic needs to adjust the historical data for the effects of these population controls. See Montes, Smith, and Dajon (2022).
Return to text
8. For example, see Goda and Soltas (2022).
Return to text
9. Displaced workers aged 65 and over had markedly lower reemployment rates and markedly higher rates of labor force exit than did similarly aged displaced workers in the years just before the pandemic. See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2022).
Return to text
10. Among those 55 and over, transitions into retirement are currently well above the average rate in the three years before the pandemic (after adjusting for population controls). At the same time, retirees are returning to the labor force at a rate similar to that before the pandemic.
Return to text
11. First, due primarily to COVID, mortality over the past few years has far exceeded what had been expected before the pandemic. This channel accounts for about 400,000 of the labor force shortfall. Total deaths due to COVID are much larger—about 1 million people. However, the effect on the labor force is smaller than this because COVID deaths have mostly been among older people, who participate in the labor force at lower rates than younger people.
Second, due, at least in part, to pandemic-related restrictions on entry into the United States, total immigration has slowed substantially since the start of the pandemic, lowering the labor force by about 1 million people relative to pre-pandemic trends. While lawful, nonpermanent immigration (for example, H-1B and H-2B visa holders) has bounced back considerably since earlier in the pandemic, these categories of immigration are generally still below 2019 levels. Meanwhile, lawful permanent immigration (that is, new green card holders) is also somewhat lower than in 2019 and well below levels that prevailed earlier in the 2010s. Regarding undocumented immigration, while migrant encounters at the U.S.–Mexico border have been high lately, some estimates suggest the number of undocumented immigrants in the United States is not much different than in 2019. (For data on legal immigration, see U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 2022; for data on border encounters, see U.S. Customs and Border Protection, 2022; for estimates of the number of undocumented immigrants, see Camarota and Zeigler, 2022.).
Return to text
i. Note: On December 2, 2022, a typo was corrected to change the month labels on Figure 3.
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 37
==================================================
November 28, 2022
What Can We Learn from the Pandemic and the War  about Supply Shocks, Inflation, and Monetary Policy?
Vice Chair Lael Brainard
At the 21st BIS Annual Conference Central Banking after the Pandemic: Challenges Ahead, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland
Share
Policymakers and researchers have begun reassessing certain features of the economy and monetary policy in light of recent experience. After several decades in which supply was highly elastic and inflation was low and relatively stable, a series of supply shocks associated with the pandemic and Russia's war against Ukraine have contributed to high inflation, in combination with a very rapid recovery in demand. The experience with the pandemic and the war highlights the challenges for monetary policy in responding to a protracted series of adverse supply shocks. In addition, to the extent that the lower elasticity of supply we have seen recently could become more common due to challenges such as demographics, deglobalization, and climate change, it could herald a shift to an environment characterized by more volatile inflation compared with the preceding few decades.
1
Inflation in the United States and many countries around the world is very high (
figure 1
). While both demand and supply are contributing to high inflation, it is the relative inelasticity of supply in key sectors that most clearly distinguishes the pandemic- and war-affected period of the past three years from the preceding 30 years of the Great Moderation.
2
Interestingly, inflation is broadly higher throughout much of the global economy, and even jurisdictions that began raising rates forcefully in 2021 have not stemmed the global inflationary tide.
3
In the United States, as a result of significant fiscal and monetary support, the level of private domestic final purchases recovered extremely rapidly in 2020 and 2021 to levels consistent with the pre-pandemic trend before moving below trend in 2022 (
figure 2
). Although demand came in near the pre-pandemic trend on an aggregate level, the pandemic induced a shift in composition that concentrated large increases in demand in certain sectors where the supply response was constrained. The shift in consumption from services to goods was so pronounced that—despite plunging at the onset of the pandemic in March 2020—real spending on goods had already risen nearly 4 percent above its pre-pandemic trend by June of that year. While a very slow rotation back toward pre-pandemic patterns of consumption has been under way for over a year, it remains incomplete more than two and a half years after the initial shutdown: In the most recent data, the level of goods spending remains 6 percent above the level implied by its pre-pandemic trend, while services spending remains a little more than 2 percent below its pre-pandemic trend (
figure 3
).
The supply shocks to goods, labor, and commodities have been accompanied by unusually high volatility in monthly inflation readings since the beginning of the pandemic. Since March 2020, the standard deviation of month-over-month core inflation has been 0.22 percentage point—a level of variation not seen in a 31-month period since the 1970s and more than double the standard deviation in monthly core inflation from 1990 to 2019. The initial drivers of this high variation in monthly core inflation readings were a sharp drop in prices and subsequent bounceback in the first months of the pandemic, followed by a couple of bursts lasting three to four months each. The first burst occurred around reopening in the spring of 2021, and the second occurred amid the effects of the Delta and Omicron COVID-19 variants in the autumn of 2021 (
figure 4
).
4
The evidence suggests that high concentrations of demand in sectors such as appliances, housing, and motor vehicles—where supply was constrained by the effects of the pandemic—played an important role initially in generating inflationary pressures. Acute constraints on shipping and on the supply of nonsubstitutable intermediate inputs like semiconductors were compounded by acute constraints on labor supply associated with the effects of the Delta and Omicron variants and later compounded further by sharp commodities supply shocks associated with Russia's war on Ukraine.
The standard monetary policy prescription is to "look through" supply shocks, such as commodities price shocks or shutdowns of ports or semiconductor plants, that are not assessed to leave a lasting imprint on potential output.
5
In contrast, if supply shocks durably lower potential output such that the economy is operating above potential, monetary policy tightening is necessary to bring demand into alignment with the economy's reduced productive capacity. Importantly, and separately from the implications for potential output, monetary policy should respond strongly if supply shocks risk de-anchoring inflation expectations.
6
Although these tenets of monetary policy sound relatively straightforward in theory, they are challenging to assess and implement in practice. It is difficult to assess potential output and the output gap in real time, as has been extensively documented by research.
7
This is especially true in an environment of high uncertainty. The level of uncertainty around the output gap varies considerably over time, and research suggests that more muted policy reactions are warranted when uncertainty about the output gap is high.
8
The unexpectedly long-lasting global pandemic and the sharp disruptions to commodities associated with Russia's war against Ukraine have contributed to substantial uncertainty (
figure 5
).
Even so, the drawn-out sequence of shocks to the supply of labor, commodities, and key intermediate inputs, such as semiconductors, blurred the lines about what constitutes a temporary shock as opposed to a persistent shock to potential output. Even when each individual supply shock fades over time and behaves like a temporary shock on its own, a drawn-out sequence of adverse supply shocks that has the cumulative effect of constraining potential output for an extended period is likely to call for monetary policy tightening to restore balance between demand and supply.
In addition, a protracted series of supply shocks associated with an extended period of high inflation—as with the pandemic and the war—risks pushing the inflation expectations of households and businesses above levels consistent with the central bank's long-run inflation objective.
9
It is vital for monetary policy to keep inflation expectations anchored, because inflation expectations shape the behavior of households, businesses, and workers and enter directly into the inflation process. In the presence of a protracted series of supply shocks and high inflation, it is important for monetary policy to take a risk-management posture to avoid the risk of inflation expectations drifting above target. Even in the presence of pandemics and wars, central bankers have the responsibility to ensure that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored at levels consistent with our target.
In monitoring inflation expectations for purposes of risk management, not only the median but also the distribution of inflation expectations can provide important information about how inflation expectations may be changing.
10
Survey measures suggest that the median of longer-term inflation has remained within pre-pandemic ranges consistent with 2 percent inflation (
figure 6
). However, starting in 2021, there has been a greater dispersion than usual of views about future inflation in survey responses, as shown in figure 6. Although initially the increased dispersion reflected a rise in expectations for significantly above-target inflation, more recently, following substantial cumulative monetary policy tightening, the increased dispersion has also reflected increased expectations of no inflation or even disinflation. About one-fourth of respondents to the most recent University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers anticipate that prices are likely to be the same or below their current level 5 to 10 years in the future—roughly three times the average fraction that reported such expectations before the pandemic.
Finally, it is important to explore whether any features of the inelastic supply response associated with the pandemic and the war may have implications for potential growth and macroeconomic stability in the future.
11
In particular, despite the unprecedented pandemic policy support for businesses of all sizes that was directed at preserving the supply side of the economy, key sectors struggled to ramp up activity after reopening. The supply response was particularly impaired in sectors where supply chains are geographically fragmented and recurring foreign COVID-19 lockdowns have reduced the reliability of foreign supplies. While conditions have improved dramatically from some of the worst periods in 2021, measures like the Global Supply Chain Pressure Index from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York indicate that total supply chain pressures still are elevated relative to pre-pandemic levels (
figure 7
).
The supply disruptions in key goods and commodities sectors associated with the pandemic and Russia's war against Ukraine have highlighted the fragility of global supply chains and the risks of inelastic supply at moments of stress. Conditions have improved dramatically over the past year, judging by the return of the ISM Supplier Deliveries index to its pre-pandemic range of values (
figure 8
). That said, ongoing discussions about moving from "just in time" to "just in case" inventory management and from offshoring to "nearshoring" are raising important questions about the extent to which businesses are likely to reconfigure global supply chains based on a reassessment of the tradeoff between cost efficiency and supply resilience.
Similarly, some have conjectured that the slow and incomplete recovery of the workforce over the course of the pandemic may be the beginning of a longer-term change in labor supply dynamics (
figure 9
).
12
In addition, the potential for more frequent and severe climate events, as we are already seeing, and for frictions in the energy transition could also lead to greater volatility of supply. Together, a combination of forces—the deglobalization of supply chains, the higher frequency and severity of climate disruptions, and demographic shifts—could lead to a period of lower supply elasticity and greater inflation volatility.
To conclude, the experience with the pandemic and the war highlights challenges for monetary policy in responding to supply shocks. A protracted series of adverse supply shocks could persistently weigh on potential output or could risk pushing inflation expectations above target in ways that call for monetary policy to tighten for risk-management reasons. More speculatively, it is possible that longer-term changes—such as those associated with labor supply, deglobalization, and climate change—could reduce the elasticity of supply and increase inflation volatility into the future.
1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text and to Kenneth Eva for preparing the figures. This text updates the views that I discussed as part of a panel at the BIS Annual Meeting on June 24, 2022. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. Research has generated a range of estimates on the contributions from supply and demand factors. For example, Shapiro (2022) finds that demand factors are responsible for about one-third of the surge in inflation above the pre-pandemic trend, while di Giovanni and others (2022) find a number closer to two-thirds. See Adam Shapiro (2022), "
How Much Do Supply and Demand Drive Inflation?
" FRBSF Economic Letter 2022-15 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June); and Julian di Giovanni, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Alvaro Silva, and Muhammed Yildirim (2022), "
Global Supply Chain Pressures, International Trade, and Inflation (PDF)
," paper presented at the ECB Forum on Central Banking 2022, Sintra, Portugal, June 27–29.
Return to text
3. The median year-to-date total policy rate hike within the group of Brazil, Hungary, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, and South Korea is 6 percentage points. All of these countries began forceful rate hikes in 2021, and the cumulative hikes have taken policy rates in some of these countries above 10 percent. Despite this, through September 2022 core inflation in these countries was 9.5 percent year-over-year, rising 3.5 percentage points since March. See Economist (2022), "Even Super-Tight Policy Is Not Bringing Down Inflation," October 28, https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2022/10/23/even-super-tight-policy-is-not-bringing-down-inflation.
Return to text
4. Pandemic fiscal measures played an important role in boosting demand, but the rapid deceleration of inflation over the summer of 2021 and subsequent rebound in inflation from October through the end of the year do not line up well with the fiscal demand impulse projected by most forecasters. For example, the Brookings Institution projected a smooth demand impulse from the American Rescue Plan that peaked at the end of last year. See Wendy Edelberg and Louise Sheiner (2021), "
The Macroeconomic Implications of Biden's $1.9 Trillion Fiscal Package
," Brookings Institution,
Up Front
(blog), January 28.
Return to text
5. See, for instance, Martin Bodenstein, Christopher J. Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2008), "Optimal Monetary Policy with Distinct Core and Headline Inflation Rates,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 55 (October), pp. S18–33, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304393208001050#!.
Return to text
6. Ricardo Reis makes the case that both these factors would have prescribed tighter policy in the current environment.
See Ricardo Reis (2022), "
The Burst of High Inflation in 2021–22: How and Why Did We Get Here?
" CEPR Discussion Paper Series DP17514 (London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, July).
Return to text
7. See Athanasios Orphanides and Simon van Norden (2002), "The Unreliability of Output-Gap Estimates in Real Time,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 84 (November), pp. 569–83.
Return to text
8. For discussions of the time-varying nature of output gap uncertainty, see Travis J. Berge (2020), "
Time-Varying Uncertainty of the Federal Reserve's Output Gap Estimate
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-012 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February; revised April 2021); and Rochelle M. Edge and Jeremy B. Rudd (2016), "Real-Time Properties of the Federal Reserve's Output Gap,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 98 (October), pp. 785–91. For a discussion of tempering the policy response to the output gap in response to increased uncertainty, see Athanasios Orphanides (2003), "Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 50 (April), pp. 605–31.
Return to text
9. For two recent examples of assessing longer-term inflation expectations, see Michael T. Kiley (2022), "
Anchored or Not: How Much Information Does 21st Century Data Contain on Inflation Dynamics?
" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2022-016 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March); and Danilo Cascaldi-Garcia, Francesca Loria, and David López-Salido (2022), "
Is Trend Inflation at Risk of Becoming Unanchored? The Role of Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 31).
Return to text
10. See, for example, Ricardo Reis (2021), "
Losing the Inflation Anchor (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
, Fall, pp. 307–61. The Board's staff recently updated the Index of Common Inflation Expectations to include the 25th and 75th percentiles of inflation expectations over the next 12 months from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers.
Return to text
11. See, for example, Agustín Carstens (2022), "
The Return of Inflation
," speech delivered at the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, April 5.
Return to text
12. See, for example, Charles Goodhart and Manoj Pradhan (2020),
The Great Demographic Reversal: Ageing Societies, Waning Inequality, and an Inflation Revival
(Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan).
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 38
==================================================
November 17, 2022
Opportunity and Inclusive Economic Growth
Governor Philip N. Jefferson
At the 2022 Institute Research Conference, hosted by  the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Share
Watch Live
Good morning, and thank you. It is a pleasure to be here. I would like to use my time today to answer the question posed by the title of this session: What can the Fed learn from research on opportunity and inclusive growth? But, first, let me remind you that the views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else on the Federal Open Market Committee or in the Federal Reserve System.
Some of the Fed's purview—including consumer protection, community development, and financial stability—can help to support inclusive growth. But monetary policy cannot address these issues directly. I do, however, see a direct line between research on opportunity and inclusive growth and our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Fulfillment of our mandate is likely easier if certain other conditions are present. For example, if the channels of upward social mobility are open and working for all, we are likely to see both higher labor market participation and higher productivity—both of which make it easier to attain maximum employment amid low and stable inflation. The better we understand the channels that affect the health and function of the overall economy, the better we can calibrate our policy decisions to deliver on our dual mandate.
Those channels consist of several areas that are, largely, not ours to make policy about but are important for our policies to be effective in promoting the conditions for prosperity. They include health, housing, transportation, childcare, disability services, education, access to the financial system, and access to capital.
First, I would like to address monetary policy. In pursuing its dual mandate, the Federal Reserve is essentially trying to foster and maintain the conditions in which the economy and all its participants can thrive. Research has shown that the benefits of a strong economy—with high employment and stable prices—are especially significant for less advantaged groups.
1
These groups also tend to see the greatest gains later in an expansion, meaning that they benefit the most from sustained periods of growth—like the expansion we were experiencing before the pandemic, which was the longest on record.
2
For example, during the pre-pandemic expansion, the long-standing disparity between unemployment rates for prime-age African Americans and Hispanics and their white counterparts began to close. In fact, disparities in labor market outcomes just prior to the onset of the pandemic were the narrowest in at least 50 years. At the same time, inflation remained low—lower, in fact, than our 2 percent target for most of that time—and showed little sign of picking up despite the strong labor market.
Unfortunately, the pandemic brought about the most rapid and severe labor market contraction of the past 80 years. It also had a noticeably larger effect on the unemployment rates of women and of Black and Hispanic individuals than it did on most other demographic groups. And while job losses were widespread across all sectors of the economy, workers with less education were particularly hard hit. This was especially true for those unable to work remotely or in jobs that required in-person interactions.
As the economy reopened and began to recover, unemployment rates for those groups initially affected the most—Black and Hispanic workers—also fell more sharply. Today, while material disparities in unemployment rates along racial lines persist, these disparities have almost returned to the narrower ranges we saw just before the pandemic.
However, as the economy has recovered, strong demand and a variety of supply constraints have contributed to the fastest increases in consumer prices since the early 1980s. Inflation, too, has disproportionate effects on, and is felt most acutely by, those who can least afford it. Price increases have been particularly sharp for necessities like food, transportation, and shelter, which make up a substantial portion of household budgets for people on the lower end of the pay scale. Lower-income households also have less in savings to buffer price increases, meaning that they not only feel the effects more forcefully, but they also feel them immediately. The savings they do have are more likely to be in cash or noninterest-bearing accounts, which means inflation directly erodes the purchasing power of their savings.
Monetary policy cannot address the specific reasons that low-income households suffer the most from high inflation. But these reasons help to illustrate the importance of low inflation: Low inflation is key to achieving a long and sustained expansion—an economy that works for all. Pursuing our dual mandate is the best way for the Federal Reserve to promote widely shared prosperity. At the same time, it is critical for monetary policymakers to understand the many and varied conditions that can make our policies more effective in fostering prosperity.
Now let me turn to these concomitant conditions for prosperity outside of the Fed's mandate, which nevertheless should be carefully studied. Many of them are straightforward, like housing, transportation, and childcare. Even as remote work has increased, many jobs remain in person and on site. If people cannot live near work, either because of the cost or because jobs are located in nonresidential areas, they must commute. Commuting depends on public or personal transportation—which in turn relies on infrastructure, such as roads and highways. And time spent commuting affects childcare decisions. Caring responsibilities overall—for children or for other relatives—can keep people out of the workforce, and the onus falls disproportionately on women. This was particularly evident during the pandemic, and particularly true for Black and Hispanic mothers.
3
Financial participation is also clearly connected to prosperity. Being unbanked means less financial security. Less access to credit means a smaller, or even nonexistent, safety net, but it also means less opportunity, be that buying a house to build capital, funding education, or starting a business.
But there are other, less obvious—or even less quantifiable—issues. Beyond location, a home provides both basic needs, such as shelter, and invaluable benefits, such as a sense of personal safety and dignity. It is a refuge in which our minds and bodies can recuperate and regenerate so we are prepared to participate in all aspects of life, including the next day's work. The costs of living in disadvantaged areas or of dealing with financial hardship can be seen in all areas of life. Higher stress, the frequent necessity of working more than one job, the absence of benefits, and the time and money spent commuting—all these exact a financial and psychological toll. There is a fundamental aspect of our humanity, which is to live a more fulfilling existence—to enjoy the richness of life. In an economy that works for all, we should not live to work, but work to live. These are the factors that will allow people to thrive.
Of course, policies that can address these important issues are not made by Fed policymakers. But the research agenda we are discussing today helps us to understand better those aspects of well-being that allow people to prosper and to enrich their lives more broadly. Thank you.
1. See Tomaz Cajner, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017), "
Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).
Return to text
2. See, for example, Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019), "
Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)
"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Spring, pp. 333–75.
Return to text
3. See Joshua Montes, Christopher Smith, and Isabel Leigh (2021), "
Caregiving for Children and Parental Labor Force Participation during the Pandemic
," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 5).
Return to text


Discurso 39
==================================================
October 10, 2022
Restoring Price Stability in an Uncertain Economic Environment
Vice Chair Lael Brainard
At "Shocks and Aftershocks: Finding Balance in an Unstable World" 64th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Chicago, Illinois
Share
Watch Live
It is a pleasure to join this discussion today.
1
Inflation is high in the United States and around the world reflecting the lingering imbalance between robust demand and constrained supply caused by the pandemic and Russia's war against Ukraine. Global supply chains have eased significantly, but by some measures they are still more constrained than at nearly any time since the late 1990s.
2
High inflation places a burden on all Americans, but especially lower-income families, who spend three-fourths of their income on necessities—more than twice the share spent by higher-income families. The Federal Reserve has tightened policy strongly to bring inflation down, and U.S. tightening is being amplified by concurrent foreign tightening. We are starting to see the effects in some areas, but it will take some time for the cumulative tightening to transmit throughout the economy and to bring inflation down. Uncertainty remains high, and I am paying close attention to the evolution of the outlook as well as global risks.
Higher interest rates are working to temper demand and bring it into better alignment with supply, which is still constrained. Output has decelerated so far this year by more than anticipated, suggesting that policy tightening is having some effect. Real gross domestic product (GDP) declined at an annual rate of roughly 1 percent in the first half. Real private domestic final purchases stepped down from a 6.4 percent pace last year to an annual rate of only 1.3 percent during the first half of this year.
Recent revisions to national income and product accounts data imply that the current stock of excess savings held by households is lower and has been drawn down more rapidly in recent quarters than had been previously estimated. Indeed, by Board staff estimates, the revisions imply that the stock of excess savings held by households is about 25 percent lower, which may imply a more subdued pace of consumer spending going forward than had been projected.
Market expectations for the level of the policy rate at the end of the year are now more than twice as high as they were just seven months ago. As a result of the significant increase in interest rates and associated tightening in broader financial conditions, I now expect that the second-half rebound will be limited, and that real GDP growth will be essentially flat this year.
3
The moderation in demand due to monetary policy tightening is only partly realized so far. The transmission of tighter policy is most evident in highly interest-sensitive sectors like housing, where mortgage rates have more than doubled year to date and house price appreciation has fallen sharply over recent months and is on track to soon be flat. In other sectors, lags in transmission mean that policy actions to date will have their full effect on activity in coming quarters, and the effect on price setting may take longer. The moderation in demand should be reinforced by the concurrent rapid global tightening of monetary policy.
Against the backdrop of slower output growth, we are seeing some tentative signs of rebalancing in the labor market. Anecdotal reports suggest the availability and retention of workers are improving.
4
For the second month in a row, growth in monthly payroll employment stepped down, slowing from 315,0000 in August to 263,000 in September. There was a sharp 1.1 million decline in job openings from July to August in the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS). The ratio of job openings to job seekers declined to 1.7; for purposes of comparison, this ratio was 1.2 prior to the pandemic.
5
The sharp fall in vacancies at a time when initial claims held steady at low levels provides support for the possibility that businesses that faced significant challenges finding and retaining qualified workers following the pandemic may be more inclined than in past cycles to retain rather than lay off their workers as demand weakens. In particular, there is still a sizable 1.2 million shortfall in employment levels relative to pre-pandemic levels in the in-person services sectors that accounted for the majority of September payroll gains, suggesting businesses in those sectors may still be trying to narrow that gap.
6
That said, a variety of indicators suggest labor demand remains strong, while labor supply remains below pre-pandemic conditions. The unemployment rate is now at the very low level that prevailed pre-pandemic, and the volume of quits remains elevated.
7
This supply–demand imbalance in the labor market is reflected in strong wage growth. The employment cost index increased by an annual rate of 6.3 percent over the second quarter—its highest level in decades. A more-timely data source, average hourly earnings, decelerated slightly to a 4.4 percent annual rate over the third quarter, down from 4.6 percent annual growth in the second quarter. Although it is well above levels consistent with 2 percent inflation, wage growth has been running below current inflation.
Strong wage growth along with high rental and housing costs mean that inflation from core services is expected to ease only slowly from currently elevated levels. In contrast, core goods have been expected to return to something closer to the pre-pandemic trend of modest disinflation as a result of demand rotation away from goods to services, coupled with the healing of supply chains and declining core import prices. Disinflation in core goods would help to offset the inflationary pressures in services. During the five years before the crisis, core goods made a small negative contribution to inflation. The contribution of core goods to inflation swung sharply into positive territory in 2021, and had started to step down somewhat in the middle part of 2022.
8
So the surprise in the August inflation data was the large contribution of core goods inflation to overall inflation at a point in the post-pandemic recovery when many forecasts anticipated this contribution would continue moderating.
Since the pandemic, significant supply and demand imbalances have coincided with large increases in retail trade margins in several sectors. In some sectors, the increase in the retail trade margin exceeds the contemporaneous increase in wages paid to the workers engaged in retail trade, although this is not true in food and apparel. The return of retail margins to more normal levels could meaningfully help reduce inflationary pressures in some consumer goods, considering that gross retail margins are about 30 percent of total sales dollars overall.
For instance, among general merchandise retailers, where the real inventory-to-sales ratio is 20 percent above its pre-pandemic level, retail margins have increased 20 percent since the onset of the pandemic, roughly double the 9 percent increase in average hourly earnings by employees in that sector.
9
In the auto sector, where the real inventory-to-sales ratio is 20 percent below its pre-pandemic level, the retail margin for motor vehicles sold at dealerships has increased by more than 180 percent since February 2020, 10 times the rise in average hourly earnings within that sector.
10
So there is ample room for margin recompression to help reduce goods inflation as demand cools, supply constraints ease, and inventories increase.
Despite the higher prices for a broad set of goods and services, market- and survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are within ranges consistent with expectations that inflation will return to 2 percent over the medium term.
11
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities–based measures of five-year, five-year-forward breakeven inflation compensation are currently at 2.15 percent, roughly 10 basis points below their level at the start of the year. The median of inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years in the Michigan survey ticked down in September to 2.7 percent, below the 2.9 to 3.1 percent range in which it had been fluctuating since July 2021 and back within the range that was common before the 2015 decline in this metric.
12
Currently, there is a greater dispersion than usual of views about future inflation in survey responses. Previously this reflected a rise in expectations for significantly above-target inflation, but now that dispersion also reflects expectations on the part of one quarter of respondents that prices are likely be the same or below their current level 5 to 10 years in the future.
In order to bring inflation down and to keep inflation expectations solidly anchored at 2 percent, the Federal Reserve has increased the federal funds rate target range by 300 basis points in the past seven months, and both market and policymaker surveys indicate additional increases through the end of this year and into next year. In addition, balance sheet shrinkage is now proceeding at its maximum rate, reinforcing the move to a restrictive stance. Broader U.S. financial conditions have tightened rapidly in response: The two-year Treasury yield has moved above 4 percent for the first time since 2007, and the 10-year yield is near its highest level in over a decade at 3.9 percent. Corporate bond yields have risen even more, as investment- and speculative-grade corporate bond spreads have increased about 80 basis points and 170 basis points, respectively, over the year. Mortgage rates have more than doubled since the beginning of the year. The Board's broad dollar index has appreciated 11 percent year to date.
13
Monetary policy tightening is also proceeding rapidly abroad. Many central banks in large economies have raised rates by 125 basis points or more in the past six months, and yields on 10-year sovereign debt in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the largest euro area economies have seen increases on the order of 190 to 360 basis points this year.
14
The combined effect of concurrent global tightening is larger than the sum of its parts. The Federal Reserve takes into account the spillovers of higher interest rates, a stronger dollar, and weaker demand from foreign economies into the United States, as well as in the reverse direction. We are attentive to the risk of further adverse shocks—for instance, from Russia's war against Ukraine, the pandemic, or China's zero-COVID policies. And we are also very aware that the cross-border effects of unexpected movements in interest rates and exchange rates, as well as worsening external imbalances, in some cases could interact with financial vulnerabilities. In this environment, a sharp decrease in risk sentiment or other risk event that may be difficult to anticipate could be amplified, especially given fragile liquidity in core financial markets. In some countries, the realization of these risks could pose challenging tradeoffs for policy.
That said, the real yield curve is now in solidly positive territory at all but the very shortest maturities, and the entire real curve will soon move into positive territory with the additional tightening and deceleration in inflation that are expected over coming quarters. Monetary policy will be restrictive for some time to ensure that inflation moves back to target over time. It will take time for the cumulative effect of tighter monetary policy to work through the economy broadly and to bring inflation down. In light of elevated global economic and financial uncertainty, moving forward deliberately and in a data-dependent manner will enable us to learn how economic activity, employment, and inflation are adjusting to cumulative tightening in order to inform our assessments of the path of the policy rate.
1. I want to thank Kurt Lewis and Daniel Villar of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance on these remarks. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Global Supply Chain Pressure Index,
September 2022.
Return to text
3. Both the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) and private forecasters showed expectations of above-trend 2022 growth early this year. The March SEP showed a median projection of 2.8 percent GDP growth in 2022 and a policy rate path that almost reached 2 percent by year-end. In the March 2022 Blue Chip Economic Indicators, the consensus projection for Q4/Q4 real GDP growth in 2022 was 2.6 percent, and policy expectations for year-end 2022 in the Blue Chip Financial Forecast for the same month were 1.3 percent. On a Q4-over-Q4 basis, the September Blue Chip consensus for 2022 real GDP growth was a decline of 0.1 percent. The median expectations for real GDP growth on a Q4-over-Q4 basis in the September SEP were 0.2 percent.
Return to text
4. For example, the discussion in the September Beige Book notes that "overall labor market conditions remained tight, although nearly all Districts highlighted some improvement in labor availability, particularly among manufacturing, construction, and financial services contacts. Moreover, employers noted improved worker retention, on balance." See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022),
Beige Book
(Washington: Board of Governors, September 7).
Return to text
5. The current ratio is calculated as the number of job openings at the end of August in the most recent JOLTS release, divided by the number of unemployed persons reported in the September 2022 Current Population Survey.
Return to text
6. The total shortfall in the level of employment in September 2022 relative to the level in February 2020 from the retail trade, educational services, local government education, health care and social assistance, and leisure and hospitality sectors was 1.16 million.
Return to text
7. As shown by the data from the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's Wage Growth Tracker, through August the 12-month moving average of median wage growth among job switchers was nearly 2 percentage points higher than those who remained in their same role, with 6.9 percent growth for job switchers as opposed to 5.0 percent growth for those who remained in the same role. For more information, see
https://www.atlantafed.org/chcs/wage-growth-tracker
.
Return to text
8. Expressed on an annualized basis, the average monthly contribution from core goods to total PCE inflation in 2021 would be 1.6 percent. For data going back to 1987, the contribution of core goods to total PCE inflation on a 12-month basis reached its peak in February 2022 at 1.8 percentage points and came in at 1.3 percentage points in August 2022.
Return to text
9. See, for example, Josh Ulick and Suzanne Kapner (2022) "From Walmart to Gap, Which Retailers Have the Most Excess Inventory?"
Wall Street Journal,
June 9, https://www.wsj.com/articles/from-walmart-to-gap-which-retailers-have-the-most-excess-inventory-11654776000.
Return to text
10. For additional information, see Alana Semuels (2022), "I Paid $3,000 Above Sticker Price for My New Car. You Probably Will Too,"
Time,
September 29, https://time.com/6218046/new-car-prices-over-msrp.
Return to text
11. Although the Survey of Professional Forecasters saw large increases in expected inflation for 2022 and 2023 between the first- and third-quarter surveys, reflecting the shocks to inflation between the periods in February and August when those surveys were conducted, the implied 5-to-10-year inflation expectation remained at 2 percent throughout the surveys conducted thus far in 2022. See
https://www.philadelphiafed.org/surveys-and-data/real-time-data-research/survey-of-professional-forecasters
.
Return to text
12. For additional information, see
https://data.sca.isr.umich.edu
.
Return to text
13. The Federal Reserve's broad trade-weighted dollar index is based on 26 currencies of major U.S. trading partners. It is published in Statistical Release H.10, "Foreign Exchange Rates," available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h10/current/default.htm
.
Return to text
14. The central banks of the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, the euro area, Australia, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland together account for 49 percent of nominal global GDP measured in dollars at market exchange rates. Each of these central banks has raised its policy rate by at least 125 basis points in the past six months.
Return to text


Discurso 40
==================================================
October 04, 2022
Technology’s Impact on the Post-Pandemic Economy
Governor Philip N. Jefferson
At “Technology-Enabled Disruption:  Lessons from the Pandemic and the Path Ahead,” a conference organized by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Dallas, and Richmond
Share
Watch Live
Good morning, and thank you. It is a pleasure to be here today. I am happy to be giving my first speech as a member of the Board of Governors at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. I would like to thank the Atlanta, Dallas, and Richmond Feds for inviting me today and for bringing together this collection of expertise and research.
Today I would like to continue the discussion you have been having about tech-enabled responses to the pandemic. Then I would like to delve a bit further into what those pandemic-related disruptions have meant for economic activity at the microlevel and how the changes of the past few years affect how I view the outlook for the macroeconomy.
This may be my first speech as a Fed Governor, but I am well aware of one practice associated with these occasions. That practice requires me to say that I am speaking for myself alone. My views do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else at the Board of Governors or in the Federal Reserve System.
Technology-Enabled Solutions to Pandemic Disruptions
Turning to the subject of this conference, there is no question that technology helped households and businesses to adapt and adjust in many ways to the disruption brought about by the pandemic. Those adaptations—from enabling people to keep working to helping businesses stay open—undoubtedly prevented worse outcomes. They also likely changed the economic landscape for good and, in many cases, for the better—from hybrid working and how businesses approach distribution, investment, and inventories to the way consumers shop and pay for goods and services. Those changes are evident across broad categories, each of which this conference has discussed in some detail.
Supply chain and business investment underwent, and are still experiencing, significant change. Large increases in computers and peripherals investment enabled remote work and helped to automate processes at physical establishments while simultaneously minimizing in-person contact.
Likewise, the labor market showed great adaptability in the rapidity and relative ease that many sectors showed in shifting to remote working. Of course, that did not translate to all areas of employment, such as those jobs that require person-to-person interaction. Nevertheless, technology allowed many employees to continue working during a pandemic. Also, it likely had an indelible effect on current and future ways of working, including encapsulating hybrid work and greater flexibility for employees as fixtures.
The shift to remote and hybrid learning, however, was difficult, but without technology, learning during lockdown might have ceased entirely. In some cases, schools were closed for only a few weeks or months, and the entire in-person learning apparatus was replaced with technology-enabled remote learning. The teachers and administrators—and I was one at the time—adapted remarkably quickly to a dramatically different set of tools and techniques. Teachers, students, and parents made a rapid shift to an entirely new dynamic, often on entirely new platforms. We are still learning the lessons of that interlude, and they can influence how schools at all levels think about future planning. My colleagues and I recently heard from a community college administrator about the challenges she faced. Training programs that fill worker demand in local industries require hands-on experience, which meant retooling the curriculum for a hybrid environment. Student services also had to change to accommodate the increased need for childcare and other pandemic-related hurdles, or her school risked a drop in enrollment.
The payments system has also seen an acceleration in alternative online and mobile payment methods as well as contactless payment options. We all remember the onset of the pandemic, when social distancing became imperative and delivery and curbside pickup became the norm for many. Remote card payments naturally rose as in-person use fell. As stores reopened while the fear factor was still considerable, the contactless payment options that were available on cards and mobile devices received more attention. Such changes, coupled with the growing prominence of person-to-person money transfer apps, provided consumers with remote and touchless cash substitutes in their daily lives. The expanded use of those various payment options rested on the foundation of an intricate, robust payments ecosystem. That system supported a migration from in-person payment options to no-contact alternatives, helping restart the economy during a time of deep stress.
These are just a few of the examples you have been discussing, and there are many more. The pandemic, and the tech-enabled responses to it, changed the economy in fundamental ways that will likely not revert. It is vital to understand those changes and the effects they will have going forward.
As an economist looking at these issues on a microlevel, I appreciate the expertise on display at this conference. From my new perch as a Fed Governor taking the macro view, the research presented gives more context to the wider economic playing field. From either perspective, the technology-enabled responses and the changes brought about by the pandemic itself are important issues for policymakers to understand. They affect how we look at the economy overall.
As I look ahead, I am considering how those changes affect the outlook, and I would like to speak a bit about how I see the economy evolving as we move forward.
Outlook
The labor market remains strong, as can be seen across a variety of measures, from the low unemployment rate to the high quits rate, which illustrates the confidence of workers who are willing to leave their jobs in pursuit of better ones. Labor force participation remains lower than it was prior to the pandemic, reflecting several factors, including people who left the workforce for early retirement and some remaining parents and other caregivers who stayed home through the pandemic. These are not factors that reverse on a dime.
With still-strong labor demand and sluggish labor supply, the job market remains very tight. Workers are moving between jobs more rapidly than in the past, putting upward pressure on wages. In a market with more job openings than workers, the competition to fill vacancies is leading to rapid wage gains now, and the resulting salary compression may lead to further upward wage pressures in the future. As growth has slowed this year, supply–demand conditions in the labor market—and the overall economy—seem likely to ease some. We have already seen some indications from survey data, information from transportation hubs, and producer prices that supply bottlenecks have, at long last, begun to resolve.
Nonetheless, inflation remains elevated, and this is the problem that concerns me most. Inflation creates economic burdens for households and businesses, and everyone feels its effects. It can also change people's expectations about how long lasting price rises will be. Those inflation expectations can become entrenched and, in doing so, increase the likelihood that high inflation will persist. While oil and gasoline prices have come down in recent months, I am concerned that fluctuations in prices of the goods to which people pay the most attention, like food and housing, will affect expectations of future inflation. Thankfully, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, consistent with our 2 percent target. I will be watching those expectations closely.
An important outcome of the shifts you have been discussing, from firms' production patterns and distribution mechanisms to consumers' purchasing decisions, is that inflation dynamics likely changed also. How and why prices change require careful study and analysis, and a data-driven approach is more essential than ever.
Restoring price stability may take some time and will likely entail a period of below-trend growth. However, I want to assure you that my colleagues and I are resolute that we will bring inflation back down to 2 percent. The full effects of monetary policy take time, but in my brief time on the Federal Open Market Committee, we have acted boldly to address rising inflation, and we are committed to taking the further steps necessary.
Implications for Policy Approaches
The fundamental shifts at the core of the economy shape my approach to policy. As we are assessing the dynamics of the macroeconomy amid rapid changes, we will be watching the data closely and applying rigorous analysis. My focus is on progress toward our goal.
It is too soon to say whether the pandemic and the changes it brought—many of which this conference has covered—are going to be permanent or ebb as time goes by. My guess is that it is likely to be a combination of the two, with some features becoming embedded, such as new approaches to working and contactless payments, and others returning to something like they were before, like the preference for in-person education.
Either way, it will take time for these changes to prove themselves to be either permanent fixtures or temporary features. Research will play a key role as we try to answer important questions. New data will help us analyze the changes to the economy, and research will assemble the pieces of the puzzle that show the bigger picture.
As we watch and assess developments in the U.S. economy, we will have to take into consideration a multitude of factors, including those rooted in technology-enabled disruption, and the strength and the staying power of the many forces that are shaping the economy.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your questions.


Discurso 41
==================================================
September 30, 2022
Global Financial Stability Considerations for Monetary Policy in a High-Inflation Environment
Vice Chair Lael Brainard
At “Financial Stability Considerations for Monetary Policy,” a research conference organized by  the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and  the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York
Share
I want to start by thanking Anna Kovner, Rochelle Edge, and Bill Bassett for organizing this conference. The current global environment highlights the importance of having strong analytic and empirical foundations to understand financial stability considerations for monetary policy, and the research presented today will help strengthen those foundations.
1
The global environment of high inflation and rising interest rates highlights the importance of paying attention to financial stability considerations for monetary policy. As monetary policy tightens globally to combat high inflation, it is important to consider how cross-border spillovers and spillbacks might interact with financial vulnerabilities.
Inflation is very high in the United States and abroad, and the risk of additional inflationary shocks cannot be ruled out. In August, CPI (consumer price index) inflation on a 12-month basis was 8.3 percent in the United States, 9.9 percent in the United Kingdom, 9.8 percent in Sweden, 9.1 percent in the euro area, 8.7 percent in Mexico, 7.0 percent in Canada, and 5.7 percent in Korea.
Central banks facing high inflation are tightening monetary policy rapidly to damp demand and bring it into alignment with supply, which is constrained in a variety of sectors. The process of resolving imbalances will be easier the more supply improves in markets for commodities, labor, and key intermediate inputs, as is generally expected, but there is a risk that supply disruptions could be prolonged or aggravated by Russia's war against Ukraine, COVID‑19 lockdowns in China, or weather disruptions. Russia's war against Ukraine has generated spikes in prices for energy, food, and agricultural inputs. Most recently, inflation in Europe was pushed higher by Russia's cessation of natural gas deliveries through the Nord Stream 1 pipeline, creating hardships for households and risking disruptions for some industries in the affected countries. China's COVID lockdown policy could also lead to supply disruptions if cases again increase. Separately, weather conditions in several areas, including China, Europe, and the United States, are exacerbating price pressures through disruptions to agriculture, shipping, and utilities.
Many central banks around the world have pivoted monetary policy strongly in order to maintain anchored expectations and forestall second-round effects from high inflation becoming embedded in wage and price setting. In the United States, the Federal Reserve has increased the federal funds rate target range by 300 basis points in the past seven months—a rapid pace by historical standards—and the Federal Open Market Committee's most recent Summary of Economic Projections indicates additional increases through the end of this year and into next year. In addition, beginning this month, balance sheet shrinkage accelerated to its maximum rate of up to $60 billion in Treasury securities per month, and up to $35 billion in agency mortgage-backed securities per month. Broader U.S. financial conditions have tightened rapidly: The 10-year Treasury yield has risen more than 200 basis points since the beginning of the year and is near its highest level in over a decade at 3.8 percent.
At a global level, monetary policy tightening is also proceeding at a rapid pace by historical standards. Including the Federal Reserve, nine central banks in advanced economies accounting for half of global GDP have raised rates by 125 basis points or more in the past six months.
2
Global financial conditions have likewise tightened. Yields on 10-year sovereign debt in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the largest euro area economies are higher year to date between 170 and 350 basis points.
It will take some time for the global tightening to have its full effect in many sectors. While the effect on financial conditions tends to be immediate or even anticipatory, the effects on activity and price setting in different sectors may occur with a lag, with highly interest-sensitive sectors such as housing adjusting quickly and less rate-sensitive sectors such as consumer spending on services adjusting more slowly.
In addition to the domestic effects from domestic tightening, there are cross-border effects of tightening through both trade and financial channels. U.S. monetary policy tightening reduces U.S. demand for foreign products, thus amplifying the effects of monetary tightening by foreign central banks. The same is true in reverse: Tightening in large jurisdictions abroad amplifies U.S. tightening by damping foreign demand for U.S. products.
Tightening in financial conditions similarly spills over to financial conditions elsewhere, which amplifies the tightening effects. These spillovers across jurisdictions are present for decreases in the size of the central bank balance sheet as well as for increases in the policy rate.
3
Some estimates suggest that the spillovers of monetary policy surprises between more tightly linked advanced economies such as the United States and Europe could be about half the size of the own-country effect when measured in terms of relative changes in local currency bond yields.
4
In contrast, spillovers through exchange rate channels tend to go in opposite directions. The Federal Reserve's broad nominal U.S. dollar index has appreciated over 10 percent year to date.
5
On balance, dollar appreciation tends to reduce import prices in the United States. But in some other jurisdictions, the corresponding currency depreciation may contribute to inflationary pressures and require additional tightening to offset.
We are attentive to financial vulnerabilities that could be exacerbated by the advent of additional adverse shocks. For instance, in countries where sovereign or corporate debt levels are high, higher interest rates could increase debt-servicing burdens and concerns about debt sustainability, which could be exacerbated by currency depreciation. An increase in risk premiums could kick off deleveraging dynamics as financial intermediaries de-risk. And shallow liquidity in some markets could become an amplification channel in the event of further adverse shocks.
For some emerging economies, high interest rates in combination with weaker demand in advanced economies could increase capital outflow pressures, particularly commodity importers facing higher commodity prices and weaker exchange rates. And these pressures would be particularly challenging for borrowers with currency mismatches between their assets and liabilities.
This is especially true at times when fiscal, macroprudential, and monetary buffers are more limited. Fiscal and monetary policy were both supportive in response to the pandemic, and both were naturally expected to reverse course as the recovery gathered steam. But the advent of the war has led to a significant hit to real incomes from large price increases in energy and other commodities in some of the most severely affected economies.
With respect to macroprudential buffers, nearly all of the jurisdictions that built countercyclical capital buffers before the pandemic released those buffers at the outset of the pandemic, and the buffers have not been fully replenished so far. A European Central Bank analysis concluded that the release of capital buffers increased headroom for banks relative to not only their regulatory thresholds, but also their internal risk controls, and enabled banks to continue providing credit to households and businesses.
6
And of course, monetary policy is focused on restoring price stability in a high-inflation environment. As the program's first research paper illustrates, in circumstances in which macroprudential policy cannot on its own eliminate the amplification of shocks through financial vulnerabilities, in a low-inflation environment, monetary policy has been relatively more accommodative than would be prescribed by a conventional monetary policy rule in order to reduce the likelihood of adverse output and employment outcomes.
7
But in a high-inflation environment, monetary policy is restrictive to restore price stability and maintain anchored inflation expectations.
The Federal Reserve's policy deliberations are informed by analysis of how U.S. developments may affect the global financial system and how foreign developments in turn affect the U.S. economic outlook and risks to the financial system. We engage in frequent and transparent communications with monetary policy officials from other countries about the evolution of the outlook in each economy and the implications for policy. We meet regularly not only with monetary policy officials from different countries, but also with fiscal and financial stability officials in a variety of international settings, which helps us to take into account cross-border spillovers and financial vulnerabilities in our respective forecasts, risk scenarios, and policy deliberations.
8
High inflation imposes significant hardships by eroding purchasing power, especially for those households that spend the greatest share of their incomes on essentials like food, housing, and transportation.
9
Following a period where a combination of high demand and a lengthy sequence of adverse supply shocks to goods, labor, and commodities drove inflation to multidecade highs, monetary policymakers are taking a risk-management posture to guard against risks of longer-term inflation expectations moving above target, which would make it more difficult to bring inflation down.
In the modal outlook, monetary policy tightening to temper demand, in combination with improvements in supply, is expected to reduce demand–supply imbalances and reduce inflation over time.
10
The real yield curve is now in solidly positive territory at all but the very shortest maturities, and with the additional tightening and deceleration in inflation that is expected over coming quarters, the entire real curve will soon move into positive territory.
It will take time for the full effect of tighter financial conditions to work through different sectors and to bring inflation down. Monetary policy will need to be restrictive for some time to have confidence that inflation is moving back to target. For these reasons, we are committed to avoiding pulling back prematurely. We also recognize that risks may become more two sided at some point. Uncertainty is currently high, and there are a range of estimates around the appropriate destination of the target range for the cycle. Proceeding deliberately and in a data-dependent manner will enable us to learn how economic activity and inflation are adjusting to the cumulative tightening and to update our assessments of the level of the policy rate that will need to be maintained for some time to bring inflation back to 2 percent.
1. I want to thank Kurt Lewis and Shaghil Ahmed of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance on these remarks. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. The central banks of the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, the euro area, Australia, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland together account for 49 percent of nominal global GDP measured in dollars at market exchange rates. Each of these central banks has raised its policy rate by at least 125 basis points in the past six months.
Return to text
3. See Lael Brainard (2015), "
Unconventional Monetary Policy and Cross-Border Spillovers
,"
speech delivered at
"Unconventional Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies,"
16th International Monetary Fund Jacques Polak Research Conference, Washington, November 6; and Lael Brainard (2017), "
Cross-Border Spillovers of Balance Sheet Normalization
," speech delivered at the National Bureau of Economic Research's Monetary Economics Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 13.
Return to text
4. A paper based on data between 2005 and 2017 found that about half of the reaction in German domestic yields spills over to U.S. yields following ECB announcements, which was nearly identical to the spillover from U.S. yields to German bund yields measured following Federal Open Market Committee announcements. See Stephanie E. Curcuru, Michiel De Pooter, and George Eckerd (2018), "
Measuring Monetary Policy Spillovers between U.S. and German Bond Yields
," International Finance Discussion Papers 1226 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April).
Return to text
5. The Federal Reserve's broad trade-weighted dollar index is based on 26 currencies of major U.S. trading partners. It is published in Statistical Release H.10, "Foreign Exchange Rates," available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h10/current/default.htm
.
Return to text
6. These findings were part of a box in the ECB's May 2022
Financial Stability Review
titled "
Transmission and Effectiveness of Capital-Based Macroprudential Policies
." See European Central Bank (2022),
Financial Stability Review
(Frankfurt: ECB, May), pp. 93–95. The countercyclical buffer has not been activated in the United States.
Return to text
7. See Tobias Adrian and Fernando Duarte (2016), "
Financial Vulnerability and Monetary Policy (PDF)
," Staff Reports 804 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December; revised November 2020).
Return to text
8. See Richard H. Clarida (2021), "
Perspectives on Global Monetary Policy Coordination, Cooperation, and Correlation
," speech delivered at the "Macroeconomic Policy and Global Economic Recovery" 2021 Asia Economic Policy Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Center for Pacific Basin Studies, San Francisco (via webcast), November 19.
Return to text
9. See Lael Brainard (2022), "
Variation in the Inflation Experiences of Households
," speech delivered at the Spring 2022 Institute Research Conference, Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis (via webcast), April 5.
Return to text
10. See, for example, the year-to-date improvement in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Global Supply Chain Pressure Index, available on the Bank's website at
https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/policy/gscpi#/interactive
.
Return to text


Discurso 42
==================================================
September 28, 2022
Welcoming Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the 2022 Community Banking Research Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors,  and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri (via pre-recorded video)
Share
Watch Live
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good morning, and welcome to the 10th annual Community Banking Research Conference. I have attended this conference twice before, including the first one back in 2013, and I can attest to the quality of the research and discussions. While I am coming to you virtually today, many of you are gathering in person for the first time in three years. I am sure it will make an excellent event even more enjoyable.
The Community Banking Research Conference brings together researchers, regulators, policymakers, and community bankers to discuss the unique and important role community banks play in our economy. The conference was launched in the years following the financial crisis, in a collaboration by the Federal Reserve, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). The conference was developed to deepen our understanding of the community bank business model and to provide a forum to discuss research with academics, policymakers, regulators, and community bankers.
The research presented over the years has informed supervisory and regulatory policy debates and continues to challenge our thinking. It has highlighted the vital links between community banks and small businesses, the availability of credit in low- and moderate-income communities, how community banks support their local communities in times of crisis, and the impact of technology.
A critical feature of the research sessions is that community bankers join academic moderators to provide feedback from a practitioner's perspective. The challenges facing community banks have changed significantly over the past 10 years. Community banks have demonstrated remarkable resilience, and conferences like this have helped regulators and supervisors to better understand those changes.
I want to congratulate the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis for a decade of hosting an important and informative conference.
And I want to thank our colleagues at the Fed, the FDIC, and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. On a sadder note, I want to recognize the passing of John Ryan, who was president of the CSBS, this past May. John's impact on the CSBS and his contributions to the financial services sector overall were significant, and he is missed by all who knew and worked with him.
Thanks also to the researchers and all the community banking professionals for their insight and contributions over the years.
Thank you all, and have a great conference.


Discurso 43
==================================================
September 07, 2022
Bringing Inflation Down
Vice Chair Lael Brainard
At the Clearing House and Bank Policy Institute 2022 Annual Conference, New York, New York
Share
Over the past year, inflation has been very high in the United States and around the world (
figure 1
). High inflation imposes costs on all households, and especially low-income households. The multiple waves of the pandemic, combined with Russia's war against Ukraine, unleashed a series of supply shocks hitting goods, labor, and commodities that, in combination with strong demand, have contributed to ongoing high inflation. With a series of inflationary supply shocks, it is especially important to guard against the risk that households and businesses could start to expect inflation to remain above 2 percent in the longer run, which would make it much more challenging to bring inflation back down to our target. The Federal Reserve is taking action to keep inflation expectations anchored and bring inflation back to 2 percent over time.
1
While last year's rapid pace of economic growth was boosted by accommodative fiscal and monetary policy as well as reopening, demand has moderated this year as those tailwinds have abated. A sizable fiscal drag on output growth alongside a sharp tightening in financial conditions has contributed to a slowing in activity. In the first half of 2022, real gross domestic product (GDP) declined outright, overall real consumer spending grew at just one-fourth of its 2021 pace, and residential investment, a particularly interest-sensitive sector, declined by 8 percent (
figure 2
).
2
The concentration of strong consumer spending in supply-constrained sectors has contributed to high inflation. Consumer spending is in the midst of an ongoing but still incomplete rotation back toward pre-pandemic patterns. Real spending on goods has declined modestly in each of the past two quarters, while real spending on services has expanded at about half its 2021 growth rate. Even so, the level of goods spending remains 5 percent above the level implied by its pre-pandemic trend, while services spending remains 4 percent below its trend (
figure 3
).
In addition to the fiscal drag and tighter financial conditions, high inflation—particularly in food and gas prices—has restrained consumer spending by reducing real purchasing power. While price increases in food and energy are weighing on discretionary spending by all Americans, they are especially hard on low-income families, who spend three-fourths of their income on necessities such as food, gas, and shelter—more than double the 31 percent for high-income households.
3
Since the very elevated prices at the pump in June, the nationwide average price of a gallon of regular unleaded gasoline has declined every day throughout July and August, most recently falling below $4 a gallon, according to the American Automobile Association.
4
The rise and fall of gasoline prices played a major role in the dynamics of inflation over the summer, contributing 0.4 percentage point to month-over-month personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation in June and subtracting 0.2 percentage point in July. This 0.6 percentage point swing in the contribution of gasoline prices was an important driver of the decline in month-over-month PCE inflation from 1 percent in June to negative 0.1 percent in July.
In contrast, food price pressures continue to worsen, reflecting Russia's continuing war against Ukraine, as well as extreme weather events in the United States, Europe, and China.
5
The PCE index for food and beverages has increased each month this year by an average of 1.2 percent, resulting in an 8-1/2 percent cumulative increase in the index year-to-date through July. For context, the net change in the food and beverages price index over the entire four-year period before the pandemic was only 0.5 percent.
Core inflation—inflation excluding volatile food and energy prices—also moderated in July. Core goods PCE inflation decelerated to 0.1 percent month-over-month in July after averaging 0.5 percent in May and June.
6
While the moderation in monthly inflation is welcome, it will be necessary to see several months of low monthly inflation readings to be confident that inflation is moving back down to 2 percent.
How long it takes to move inflation back down to 2 percent will depend on a combination of continued easing in supply constraints, slower demand growth, and lower markups, against the backdrop of anchored expectations. With regard to supply constraints, a variety of indicators are showing signs of improvement on delivery times and supplies of some goods. In addition, labor force participation showed a welcome increase in the August employment data, particularly in the boost in participation among women in the core working years of 25 to 54 years of age. Even with this improvement, the participation rate is still 1 percentage point below its pre-pandemic level, well in excess of the decline in the participation rate that would have been expected due to retirements in the absence of the pandemic.
Reductions in markups could also make an important contribution to reduced pricing pressures. Last year's rapid demand growth in the face of supply constraints led to product shortages in some areas of the economy and high margins for many firms. Although we are hearing some reports of large retailers planning markdowns due to excess inventories, we do not have hard data at an aggregate level suggesting that businesses are reducing margins in response to more price sensitivity among customers. At an aggregate level, in the second quarter, measures of profits in the nonfinancial sector relative to GDP remained near the postwar peak reached last year.
7
Using the available macroeconomic data, it is challenging to measure directly how much firms mark up their prices relative to their costs. That said, there is evidence at the sectoral level that margins remain high in areas such as motor vehicles and retail. After moving together closely for several years, starting early last year, the new motor vehicle consumer price index (CPI), which measures the price dealers charge to customers, diverged from the equivalent producer price index (PPI), which measures the price dealers paid to manufacturers. Since then, the CPI has increased three times faster than the PPI (
figure 4
). This divergence between retail and wholesale prices suggests an unusually large retail auto margin. With production now increasing, and interest-sensitive demand cooling, there may soon be pressures to reduce vehicle margins and prices in order to move the higher volume of cars being produced off dealer lots.
Similarly, overall retail margins—the difference between the price retailers charge for a good and the price retailers paid for that good—have risen significantly more than the average hourly wage that retailers pay workers to stock shelves and serve customers over the past year, suggesting that there may also be scope for reductions in retail margins. With gross retail margins amounting to about 30 percent of sales, a reduction in currently elevated margins could make an important contribution to reduced inflation pressures in consumer goods.
Labor demand continues to exhibit considerable strength, which is hard to reconcile with the more downbeat tone of activity. Year-to-date through August, payroll employment has increased by about 3-1/2 million jobs, a surprisingly strong increase given the decelerating spending and declining GDP over the first half of the year. The unemployment rate has fallen, on net, from 4 percent in January to 3.7 percent in August. Possibly the strongest indications that the labor market is tight were the first- and second-quarter readings of the employment cost index (ECI), which point to strong and broad-based growth in total hourly compensation. The 6.3 percent reading for the ECI in the second quarter was the largest annualized quarterly growth in compensation under this metric since 1982. The most recent reading of average hourly earnings suggested some possible cooling, decelerating from a gain of 0.5 percent in July to 0.3 percent in August, although it will be important to see additional data.
The deceleration in economic activity thus far this year has coincided with only a slight easing in job openings, on net, since their peak in March. The current high level of job openings relative to job seekers remains close to the largest in postwar history, consistent with a tight labor market (
figure 5
). Businesses that experienced unprecedented challenges restoring or expanding their workforces following the pandemic may be more inclined to make greater efforts to retain their employees than they normally would when facing a slowdown in economic activity. This may mean that slowing aggregate demand will lead to a smaller increase in unemployment than we have seen in previous recessions, but it is too early to draw any definitive conclusions, and I will be monitoring a variety of labor market indicators closely.
8
As we follow through on our plan to move monetary policy to an appropriately restrictive stance, the effect of the increased policy rate and pace of balance sheet shrinkage should put downward pressure on aggregate demand, particularly in interest-sensitive sectors like housing. Continued improvements in supply conditions and a further rotation of consumption away from goods and into services should also help by reducing price pressures in goods. With regard to non-housing services, the magnitude of price pressure over the next several quarters will depend on an overall slowing in spending as well as the extent to which labor supply improves in these sectors.
Since pivoting last year, our actions and communications have tightened financial conditions significantly and at a much more rapid speed than earlier cycles. So far during 2022, real 2-year yields have risen more than 350 basis points to about 1.2 percent, and 10-year real yields have risen almost 200 basis points and now stand at 0.85 percent—in the range of values for 10-year real yields from 2014 to 2018. The rapid tightening in monetary policy is also reflected in a significant increase in the projected real short rate: The Blue Chip Financial Forecasts has the expected short rate moving above 0.5 percent in real terms to a significantly higher level than pre-pandemic within the next 12 months (
figure 6
).
It may take some time for the full effect of these tighter financial conditions to work their way through the economy. The disinflationary process here at home should be reinforced by weaker demand and tightening in many other countries. This is particularly the case as Europe contends with downside risks to activity and a severe energy shortage caused by Russia's war against Ukraine, and as China maintains its zero-COVID approach against a backdrop of weaker consumption.
At some point in the tightening cycle, the risks will become more two-sided. The rapidity of the tightening cycle and its global nature, as well as the uncertainty around the pace at which the effects of tighter financial conditions are working their way through aggregate demand, create risks associated with overtightening. And if history is any guide, it is important to avoid the risk of pulling back too soon. Following a lengthy sequence of adverse supply shocks to goods, labor, and commodities that, in combination with strong demand, drove inflation to multidecade highs, we must maintain a risk-management posture to defend the inflation expectations anchor.
9
While we have no control over the supply shocks to food, energy, labor, or semiconductors, we have both the capacity and the responsibility to maintain anchored inflation expectations and price stability.
We are in this for as long as it takes to get inflation down. So far, we have expeditiously raised the policy rate to the peak of the previous cycle, and the policy rate will need to rise further. As of this month, the maximum monthly reduction in the balance sheet will be nearly double the level of the previous cycle.
10
Together, the increase in the policy rate and the reduction in the balance sheet should help bring demand into alignment with supply. Monetary policy will need to be restrictive for some time to provide confidence that inflation is moving down to target. The economic environment is highly uncertain, and the path of policy will be data dependent. While the precise course of action will depend on the evolution of the outlook, I am confident we will achieve a return to 2 percent inflation. Our resolve is firm, our goals are clear, and our tools are up to the task.
1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text and to Kenneth Eva for preparing the figures. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. For comparison, growth in the alternative activity measure of real gross domestic income (GDI) has come in just below potential in the first half of the year. The national income and product accounts contain two measures of total economic output, measured through an expenditure approach, reported as more-familiar GDP, or an income approach, reported as GDI. These two series generally track each other fairly closely, but research indicates that some independent information about the business cycle can be found in each of the series. The gap between the levels of GDP and GDI, known as the statistical discrepancy, was over $750 billion in the second quarter, by far its largest historical size. For a discussion of these series and the business cycle, see Jeremy J. Nalewaik (2010),
"The Income- and Expenditure-Side Estimates of U.S. Output Growth," (PDF)
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
, Spring, pp. 71–106.
Return to text
3. For more details on this difference and further information on how the effect of inflation varies across households, see Lael Brainard (2022),
"Variation in the Inflation Experiences of Households,"
speech delivered at the Spring 2022 Institute Research Conference, Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, April 5.
Return to text
4. For more information, see https://gasprices.aaa.com.
Return to text
5. See, for example, Kim Chipman and Tarso Veloso Ribeiro (2022), "Dried-Out Farms from China to Iowa Will Pressure Food Prices," Bloomberg, August 27.
Return to text
6. Price increases for nondurable goods moderated, and price declines in used vehicles as well as durable goods other than motor vehicles more than offset further increases in the prices of new cars and trucks. Prices for PCE services excluding energy and housing declined 0.1 percent in July, the first price decline in this category since November 2020.
Return to text
7. After-tax profits in the nonfinancial corporate sector, adjusted for inventory valuation and capital consumption and expressed as a fraction of nominal GDP, were 13 percent in the second quarter. This is just slightly lower than the series high since 1947 of 13.5 percent, set in the second quarter of 2021.
Return to text
8. The debate in this area can be seen in two recent pieces. See Andrew Figura and Chris Waller (2022),
"What Does the Beveridge Curve Tell Us about the Likelihood of a Soft Landing?"
FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 29); and Olivier Blanchard, Alex Domash, and Lawrence H. Summers (2022), "Bad News for the Fed from the Beveridge Space," Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief 22-7 (Washington: PIIE, July), https://www.piie.com/sites/default/files/documents/pb22-7.pdf.
Return to text
9. See Ricardo Reis (2022), "The Burst of High Inflation in 2021–22: How and Why Did We Get Here?" working paper.
Return to text
10. As of September 2022, the monthly caps on the runoff of Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities are $60 billion and $35 billion per month, as compared with $30 billion and $20 billion, respectively, from 2017 to 2019.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 44
==================================================
August 29, 2022
Progress on Fast Payments for All: An Update on FedNow
Vice Chair Lael Brainard
At FedNow Early Adopter Workshop, Rosemont, Illinois (via webcast)
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
I am pleased to join the FedNow Early Adopter Workshop.
1
With the technical testing phase of the FedNow℠ Service kicking off in mid-September, I want to particularly thank the early adopters for the important investments they are making to prepare for the day when the FedNow Service goes live next year. Together with our partners, we will be ready to launch the FedNow Service between May and July of 2023, bringing this innovative core instant payment infrastructure to financial institutions of every size across America. We have been working hard to deliver on time, but ultimately the number of American businesses and households that are able to access instant payments will depend on financial services providers making the necessary investments to upgrade our payments infrastructure. Together, we can ensure that all Americans have access to a modern and reliable instant payment system.
The payment system is a critical part of America's infrastructure that touches everyone. Americans rely on the payment system all day every day to make purchases, pay bills, and get paid—without ever needing to consider the complex infrastructure that is operating under the hood. American households and businesses want and deserve payment transactions that work seamlessly, reliably, and efficiently.
Fostering a safe, efficient, and widely accessible payments infrastructure has been a central part of the Fed's mission since the very beginning. The Federal Reserve Banks all around the country have provided payment and settlement services alongside the private sector for more than 100 years. Over that period, we have repeatedly innovated and invested in collaboration with the private sector to transform the payment system, using the latest technology to better meet the needs of businesses and households.
2
Now, after extensive industry engagement and planning, the Federal Reserve is on track to deliver the FedNow Service by May to July of 2023.
The FedNow Service will transform the way everyday payments are made throughout the economy, bringing substantial gains to households and businesses through the ability to send instant payments at any time on any day, and the funds being immediately available to recipients to make other payments or manage cash flow efficiently. Immediate availability of funds could be especially important for households managing their finances paycheck to paycheck or small businesses with cash flow constraints. Having the capacity to manage money in real time could help households avoid costly late payment fees or free up working capital for small businesses to finance growth. Indeed, during the pandemic, we witnessed how essential rapid access to funds can be, as many households started spending emergency relief payments on the day they were received.
3
To deliver on the promise of a payment system for the future, the Federal Reserve has made a substantial commitment to the FedNow platform, which has benefited from the innovative technologies and approaches proven by global technology companies that are vital for today's always on digital economy. Our cloud-first design, unique among central bank instant payment services, positions us for the future by enabling not only the throughput and scalability required for high-volume retail transactions but also broad geographic points of resiliency to ensure continuous service. Cloud-first design affords other key technology components such as self-healing processes and automation, which add to operational resiliency. And our development processes are agile, allowing us to deliver new features faster to financial institutions of all sizes as they are ready to adopt them based on their priorities.
We have also invested heavily in stakeholder engagement to ensure readiness for service adoption through efforts like the pilot program, the FedNow Explorer resource, the FedNow Community, the service provider showcase, and the FedNow Early Adopter Workshop.
4
To advance the goal of nationwide reach for instant payments, we have worked closely with the private-sector RTP instant payment service on message specifications to ensure alignment in support of routing interoperability.
Just as the Federal Reserve has made a substantial commitment to our new instant payment infrastructure, we are calling on industry stakeholders to do the same. The shift to real-time payment infrastructure requires a focused effort, but the shift is inevitable. The time is now for all key stakeholders—financial institutions, core service providers, software companies, and application developers—to devote the resources necessary to support instant payments. This means upgrading back-office processes, evaluating accounting procedures to accommodate a seven-business-day week, arranging liquidity providers, deploying a new customer-facing application, and promoting instant payments for key use cases to customers. As the service providers featured at this event will demonstrate in the coming days, parts of the industry have already seized on the opportunity to build new services and capabilities that support instant payments. These efforts will increase competition in the market for end-user services and promote innovation—key benefits from providing the FedNow Service as a neutral platform, accessible to financial institutions of all sizes nationwide.
I would like to personally thank our early adopters. The input that you have provided has been instrumental for our team as they have designed and built the service, and the time and energy that you have committed to this effort is important for a successful launch. I want to call on additional banks and core service providers to join your commitment to prepare for adoption of the FedNow Service. This time next year, I hope we can all have a great sense of accomplishment in our shared effort to transform America's payment system for the digital era.
1. I am grateful to Kirstin Wells of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text. The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. Lael Brainard, "
Supporting Fast Payments for All
" (remarks at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, October 3, 2018); Esther George, "
From Then to FedNow: Payments Innovation and the Federal Reserve (PDF)
," Policy Perspectives (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, December 18, 2020).
Return to text
3. Lael Brainard, "
The Future of Retail Payments in the United States
" (remarks at the FedNow Service Webinar, Washington, D.C., via webcast, August 6, 2020).
Return to text
4. Information about FedNow Service stakeholder outreach and other resources can be found at this link:
https://www.frbservices.org/financial-services/fednow
.
Return to text


Discurso 45
==================================================
August 29, 2022
Progress on Fast Payments for All: An Update on FedNow
Vice Chair Lael Brainard
At FedNow Early Adopter Workshop, Rosemont, Illinois (via webcast)
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
I am pleased to join the FedNow Early Adopter Workshop.
1
With the technical testing phase of the FedNow℠ Service kicking off in mid-September, I want to particularly thank the early adopters for the important investments they are making to prepare for the day when the FedNow Service goes live next year. Together with our partners, we will be ready to launch the FedNow Service between May and July of 2023, bringing this innovative core instant payment infrastructure to financial institutions of every size across America. We have been working hard to deliver on time, but ultimately the number of American businesses and households that are able to access instant payments will depend on financial services providers making the necessary investments to upgrade our payments infrastructure. Together, we can ensure that all Americans have access to a modern and reliable instant payment system.
The payment system is a critical part of America's infrastructure that touches everyone. Americans rely on the payment system all day every day to make purchases, pay bills, and get paid—without ever needing to consider the complex infrastructure that is operating under the hood. American households and businesses want and deserve payment transactions that work seamlessly, reliably, and efficiently.
Fostering a safe, efficient, and widely accessible payments infrastructure has been a central part of the Fed's mission since the very beginning. The Federal Reserve Banks all around the country have provided payment and settlement services alongside the private sector for more than 100 years. Over that period, we have repeatedly innovated and invested in collaboration with the private sector to transform the payment system, using the latest technology to better meet the needs of businesses and households.
2
Now, after extensive industry engagement and planning, the Federal Reserve is on track to deliver the FedNow Service by May to July of 2023.
The FedNow Service will transform the way everyday payments are made throughout the economy, bringing substantial gains to households and businesses through the ability to send instant payments at any time on any day, and the funds being immediately available to recipients to make other payments or manage cash flow efficiently. Immediate availability of funds could be especially important for households managing their finances paycheck to paycheck or small businesses with cash flow constraints. Having the capacity to manage money in real time could help households avoid costly late payment fees or free up working capital for small businesses to finance growth. Indeed, during the pandemic, we witnessed how essential rapid access to funds can be, as many households started spending emergency relief payments on the day they were received.
3
To deliver on the promise of a payment system for the future, the Federal Reserve has made a substantial commitment to the FedNow platform, which has benefited from the innovative technologies and approaches proven by global technology companies that are vital for today's always on digital economy. Our cloud-first design, unique among central bank instant payment services, positions us for the future by enabling not only the throughput and scalability required for high-volume retail transactions but also broad geographic points of resiliency to ensure continuous service. Cloud-first design affords other key technology components such as self-healing processes and automation, which add to operational resiliency. And our development processes are agile, allowing us to deliver new features faster to financial institutions of all sizes as they are ready to adopt them based on their priorities.
We have also invested heavily in stakeholder engagement to ensure readiness for service adoption through efforts like the pilot program, the FedNow Explorer resource, the FedNow Community, the service provider showcase, and the FedNow Early Adopter Workshop.
4
To advance the goal of nationwide reach for instant payments, we have worked closely with the private-sector RTP instant payment service on message specifications to ensure alignment in support of routing interoperability.
Just as the Federal Reserve has made a substantial commitment to our new instant payment infrastructure, we are calling on industry stakeholders to do the same. The shift to real-time payment infrastructure requires a focused effort, but the shift is inevitable. The time is now for all key stakeholders—financial institutions, core service providers, software companies, and application developers—to devote the resources necessary to support instant payments. This means upgrading back-office processes, evaluating accounting procedures to accommodate a seven-business-day week, arranging liquidity providers, deploying a new customer-facing application, and promoting instant payments for key use cases to customers. As the service providers featured at this event will demonstrate in the coming days, parts of the industry have already seized on the opportunity to build new services and capabilities that support instant payments. These efforts will increase competition in the market for end-user services and promote innovation—key benefits from providing the FedNow Service as a neutral platform, accessible to financial institutions of all sizes nationwide.
I would like to personally thank our early adopters. The input that you have provided has been instrumental for our team as they have designed and built the service, and the time and energy that you have committed to this effort is important for a successful launch. I want to call on additional banks and core service providers to join your commitment to prepare for adoption of the FedNow Service. This time next year, I hope we can all have a great sense of accomplishment in our shared effort to transform America's payment system for the digital era.
1. I am grateful to Kirstin Wells of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text. The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. Lael Brainard, "
Supporting Fast Payments for All
" (remarks at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, October 3, 2018); Esther George, "
From Then to FedNow: Payments Innovation and the Federal Reserve (PDF)
," Policy Perspectives (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, December 18, 2020).
Return to text
3. Lael Brainard, "
The Future of Retail Payments in the United States
" (remarks at the FedNow Service Webinar, Washington, D.C., via webcast, August 6, 2020).
Return to text
4. Information about FedNow Service stakeholder outreach and other resources can be found at this link:
https://www.frbservices.org/financial-services/fednow
.
Return to text


Discurso 46
==================================================
August 26, 2022
Monetary Policy and Price Stability
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At “Reassessing Constraints on the Economy and Policy,” an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming
Share
Watch Live
Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today.
At past Jackson Hole conferences, I have discussed broad topics such as the ever-changing structure of the economy and the challenges of conducting monetary policy under high uncertainty. Today, my remarks will be shorter, my focus narrower, and my message more direct.
The Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) overarching focus right now is to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. Price stability is the responsibility of the Federal Reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. Without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. In particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. The burdens of high inflation fall heaviest on those who are least able to bear them.
Restoring price stability will take some time and requires using our tools forcefully to bring demand and supply into better balance. Reducing inflation is likely to require a sustained period of below-trend growth. Moreover, there will very likely be some softening of labor market conditions. While higher interest rates, slower growth, and softer labor market conditions will bring down inflation, they will also bring some pain to households and businesses. These are the unfortunate costs of reducing inflation. But a failure to restore price stability would mean far greater pain.
The U.S. economy is clearly slowing from the historically high growth rates of 2021, which reflected the reopening of the economy following the pandemic recession. While the latest economic data have been mixed, in my view our economy continues to show strong underlying momentum. The labor market is particularly strong, but it is clearly out of balance, with demand for workers substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. Inflation is running well above 2 percent, and high inflation has continued to spread through the economy. While the lower inflation readings for July are welcome, a single month's improvement falls far short of what the Committee will need to see before we are confident that inflation is moving down.
We are moving our policy stance purposefully to a level that will be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent. At our most recent meeting in July, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate to 2.25 to 2.5 percent, which is in the Summary of Economic Projection's (SEP) range of estimates of where the federal funds rate is projected to settle in the longer run. In current circumstances, with inflation running far above 2 percent and the labor market extremely tight, estimates of longer-run neutral are not a place to stop or pause.
July's increase in the target range was the second 75 basis point increase in as many meetings, and I said then that another unusually large increase could be appropriate at our next meeting. We are now about halfway through the intermeeting period. Our decision at the September meeting will depend on the totality of the incoming data and the evolving outlook. At some point, as the stance of monetary policy tightens further, it likely will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases.
Restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive policy stance for some time. The historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. Committee participants' most recent individual projections from the June SEP showed the median federal funds rate running slightly below 4 percent through the end of 2023. Participants will update their projections at the September meeting.
Our monetary policy deliberations and decisions build on what we have learned about inflation dynamics both from the high and volatile inflation of the 1970s and 1980s, and from the low and stable inflation of the past quarter-century. In particular, we are drawing on three important lessons.
The first lesson is that central banks
can
and
should
take responsibility for delivering low and stable inflation. It may seem strange now that central bankers and others once needed convincing on these two fronts, but as former Chairman Ben Bernanke has shown, both propositions were widely questioned during the Great Inflation period.
1
Today, we regard these questions as settled. Our responsibility to deliver price stability is unconditional. It is true that the current high inflation is a global phenomenon, and that many economies around the world face inflation as high or higher than seen here in the United States. It is also true, in my view, that the current high inflation in the United States is the product of strong demand and constrained supply, and that the Fed's tools work principally on aggregate demand. None of this diminishes the Federal Reserve's responsibility to carry out our assigned task of achieving price stability. There is clearly a job to do in moderating demand to better align with supply. We are committed to doing that job.
The second lesson is that the public's expectations about future inflation can play an important role in setting the path of inflation over time. Today, by many measures, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored. That is broadly true of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, and of market-based measures as well. But that is not grounds for complacency, with inflation having run well above our goal for some time.
If the public expects that inflation will remain low and stable over time, then, absent major shocks, it likely will. Unfortunately, the same is true of expectations of high and volatile inflation. During the 1970s, as inflation climbed, the anticipation of high inflation became entrenched in the economic decisionmaking of households and businesses. The more inflation rose, the more people came to expect it to remain high, and they built that belief into wage and pricing decisions. As former Chairman Paul Volcker put it at the height of the Great Inflation in 1979, "Inflation feeds in part on itself, so part of the job of returning to a more stable and more productive economy must be to break the grip of inflationary expectations."
2
One useful insight into how actual inflation may affect expectations about its future path is based in the concept of "rational inattention."
3
When inflation is persistently high, households and businesses must pay close attention and incorporate inflation into their economic decisions. When inflation is low and stable, they are freer to focus their attention elsewhere. Former Chairman Alan Greenspan put it this way: "For all practical purposes, price stability means that expected changes in the average price level are small enough and gradual enough that they do not materially enter business and household financial decisions."
4
Of course, inflation has just about everyone's attention right now, which highlights a particular risk today: The longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched.
That brings me to the third lesson, which is that we must keep at it until the job is done. History shows that the employment costs of bringing down inflation are likely to increase with delay, as high inflation becomes more entrenched in wage and price setting. The successful Volcker disinflation in the early 1980s followed multiple failed attempts to lower inflation over the previous 15 years. A lengthy period of very restrictive monetary policy was ultimately needed to stem the high inflation and start the process of getting inflation down to the low and stable levels that were the norm until the spring of last year. Our aim is to avoid that outcome by acting with resolve now.
These lessons are guiding us as we use our tools to bring inflation down. We are taking forceful and rapid steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply, and to keep inflation expectations anchored. We will keep at it until we are confident the job is done.
1. See Ben Bernanke (2004), "
The Great Moderation
," speech delivered at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, February 20; Ben Bernanke (2022), "Inflation Isn't Going to Bring Back the 1970s,"
New York Times,
June 14.
Return to text
2. See Paul A. Volcker (1979), "
Statement before the Joint Economic Committee of the U.S. Congress, October 17, 1979
,"
Federal Reserve Bulletin,
vol. 65 (November), p. 888.
Return to text
3. A review of the applications of rational inattention in monetary economics appears in Christopher A. Sims (2010), "Rational Inattention and Monetary Economics," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,
Handbook of Monetary Economics,
vol. 3 (Amsterdam: North-Holland), pp. 155–81.
Return to text
4. See Alan Greenspan (1989), "
Statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 21, 1989
,"
Federal Reserve Bulletin,
vol. 75 (April), pp. 274–75.
Return to text


Discurso 47
==================================================
July 19, 2022
Strengthening the CRA: A Conversation with Representatives of Native Communities
Vice Chair Lael Brainard
At National Native Coalition Virtual Series on the Community Reinvestment Act Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Good afternoon.
1
I am happy to join you today for the National Native Coalition listening session to discuss the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). I want to thank the National Congress of American Indians and its many tribal partners, as well as Casey Lozar and his team at the Center for Indian Country Development at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. I am pleased to be joined by Acting Comptroller of the Currency Michael Hsu of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and Acting Chairman Martin Gruenberg of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).
In May, the Federal Reserve, the OCC, and the FDIC issued a unified proposal to modernize the CRA regulations. This is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to strengthen the CRA to bring greater credit, investment, and banking services to the communities that have faced the greatest challenges. For the first time, the CRA will provide powerful incentives for banks to make investments in communities that do not have access to branches, such as in Native lands.
As representatives of Native communities, you know all too well the challenges faced by Native communities in getting access to financial services—challenges that were made worse by the pandemic. I have visited with Native communities in South Dakota and Oklahoma and seen firsthand the resiliency and innovation of these communities in the face of numerous challenges.
2
Even with the implementation of the CRA and other complementary laws, tribal economic inclusion is hindered by a lack of banking and credit access. As of the most recent 2019 data, over 16 percent of Native Americans are unbanked—three times higher than the rate for all U.S. households.
3
In part, the large share that is unbanked reflects low access to a bank branch. As of 2021, majority-Native American counties have an average of only two and a half bank branches—less than one-tenth the 26-branch overall average for all counties nationwide.
4
Native small businesses often struggle to access capital: CRA small business and small farm lending per capita in majority-Native American census tracts is only about a quarter of that in majority-White-non-Hispanic tracts.
5
As representatives of Native communities, you bring valuable insights to CRA reform because of your extensive knowledge of the investment and credit needs of Native communities, citizens, and businesses. The interagency CRA proposal was informed by consultation with Native representatives through roundtables, listening sessions, meetings, and comment letters. Indeed, we took much of your feedback from comment letters to develop the Native Land Areas sections of this proposal. As a result of this valuable feedback, the interagency CRA proposal would provide additional scope for bank loans, investments, and services in Native communities. Today, I want to focus on several aspects of the proposal that are beneficial for Native communities.
First, the proposal provides greater incentives for community investments in Native Land Areas by providing enhanced clarity and specificity about what activities qualify for CRA credit. The proposed activities in Native Land Areas cover four specific place-based categories: revitalization; essential community facilities; essential community infrastructure; and disaster preparedness and climate resiliency. The proposal also incorporates a new definition of Native Land Areas based on the political status and government recognition of tribes and tribal areas that would enable the qualification of place-based activities in Native Land Areas.
The proposal also provides clarity for Native community development financial institutions (CDFIs) and minority depository institutions (MDIs). Recognizing that Native CDFIs and MDIs are critical players in supporting credit access and investment in Native communities, the proposal provides additional certainty that activities with Treasury-certified CDFIs will qualify for CRA consideration and provides greater clarity to banks on receiving credit for activities with MDIs.
The agencies also propose maintaining a publicly available illustrative list of eligible community development activities, which provides an opportunity to highlight qualifying activities particularly responsive to the needs of Native communities.
In another important change, the proposal would result in greater CRA activity outside of where banks have branches and physical locations in order to address unmet needs in communities that have more limited access to bank branches. To this end, we also propose evaluating the impact and responsiveness of a bank's community development activities through a series of specific qualitative factors, with activities benefitting Native communities as one of those specific factors.
In addition, now that many banks conduct significant lending and investments outside of their branch networks, it is important to ensure CRA accounts for these different business models. For example, we propose establishing retail lending assessment areas where a large bank has a concentration of either 100 mortgage loans or 250 small business loans for two years in a row.
Finally, the proposal would continue to emphasize a bank's performance in the local communities where it maintains branches, regardless of their performance in other areas. In addition to assessing a large bank's retail lending and community development activities in each facility-based assessment area, we also propose to evaluate whether banks have branches in low-income and moderate-income census tracts. In particular, the agencies propose providing positive qualitative consideration if banks operate branches located in Native Land Areas.
In closing, your feedback is key to ensuring that we get CRA reform right. I strongly encourage you to submit a comment letter by the August 5th deadline. We look forward to reading each comment letter and deeply appreciate your insight and participation with us through the rulemaking process. Thank you.
1. I am grateful to Amanda Roberts and Matthew Lambert of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. See Lael Brainard, "
Financial Inclusion and Economic Challenges in the Shadow of the Pandemic: A Conversation with Tribal Leaders
" (speech at Fed Listens: Roundtable with Oklahoma Tribal Leaders, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, October 13, 2021).
Return to text
3. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, "
How America Banks: Household Use of Banking and Financial Services
," FDIC Survey (2019).
Return to text
4. Information calculated using Summary of Deposits (SoD) 2021. Note that not all counties, especially some with high Native American populations, exist in the SoD dataset.
Return to text
5. Federal Reserve Board staff analyzed annually reported CRA Small Business and Small Farm loan data submitted by banks at the tract level and combined it with demographic data from the American Community Survey 2015-2019 5-Year Survey.
Return to text


Discurso 48
==================================================
July 08, 2022
Crypto-Assets and Decentralized Finance through a Financial Stability Lens
Vice Chair Lael Brainard
At Bank of England Conference, London, United Kingdom
Share
Recent volatility has exposed serious vulnerabilities in the crypto financial system.
1
While touted as a fundamental break from traditional finance, the crypto financial system turns out to be susceptible to the same risks that are all too familiar from traditional finance, such as leverage, settlement, opacity, and maturity and liquidity transformation. As we work to future-proof our financial stability agenda, it is important to ensure the regulatory perimeter encompasses crypto finance.
Distinguishing Responsible Innovation from Regulatory Evasion
New technology often holds the promise of increasing competition in the financial system, reducing transaction costs and settlement times, and channeling investment to productive new uses. But early on, new products and platforms are often fraught with risks, including fraud and manipulation, and it is important and sometimes difficult to distinguish between hype and value. If past innovation cycles are any guide, in order for distributed ledgers, smart contracts, programmability, and digital assets to fulfill their potential to bring competition, efficiency, and speed, it will be essential to address the basic risks that beset all forms of finance. These risks include runs, fire sales, deleveraging, interconnectedness, and contagion, along with fraud, manipulation, and evasion. In addition, it is important to be on the lookout for the possibility of new forms of risks, since many of the technological innovations underpinning the crypto ecosystem are relatively novel.
Far from stifling innovation, strong regulatory guardrails will help enable investors and developers to build a resilient digital native financial infrastructure. Strong regulatory guardrails will help banks, payments providers, and financial technology companies (FinTechs) improve the customer experience, make settlement faster, reduce costs, and allow for rapid product improvement and customization.
We are closely monitoring recent events where risks in the system have crystallized and many crypto investors have suffered losses. Despite significant investor losses, the crypto financial system does not yet appear to be so large or so interconnected with the traditional financial system as to pose a systemic risk. So this is the right time to ensure that like risks are subject to like regulatory outcomes and like disclosure so as to help investors distinguish between genuine, responsible innovation and the false allure of seemingly easy returns that obscures significant risk. This is the right time to establish which crypto activities are permissible for regulated entities and under what constraints so that spillovers to the core financial system remain well contained.
Insights from Recent Turbulence
Several important insights have emerged from the recent turbulence in the crypto-finance ecosystem. First, volatility in financial markets has provided important information about crypto's performance as an asset class. It was already clear that crypto-assets are volatile, and we continue to see wild swings in crypto-asset values. The price of Bitcoin has dropped by as much as 75 percent from its all-time high over the past seven months, and it has declined almost 60 percent in the three months from April through June. Most other prominent crypto-assets have experienced even steeper declines over the same period. Contrary to claims that crypto-assets are a hedge to inflation or an uncorrelated asset class, crypto-assets have plummeted in value and have proven to be highly correlated with riskier equities and with risk appetite more generally.
2
Second, the Terra crash reminds us how quickly an asset that purports to maintain a stable value relative to fiat currency can become subject to a run. The collapse of Terra and the previous failures of several other unbacked algorithmic stablecoins are reminiscent of classic runs throughout history. New technology and financial engineering cannot by themselves convert risky assets into safe ones.
Third, crypto platforms are highly vulnerable to deleveraging, fire sales, and contagion—risks that are well known from traditional finance—as illustrated by the freeze on withdrawals at some crypto lending platforms and exchanges and the bankruptcy of a prominent crypto hedge fund. Some retail investors have found their accounts frozen and suffered large losses. Large crypto players that used leverage to boost returns are scrambling to monetize their holdings, missing margin calls, and facing possible insolvency. As their distress intensifies, it has become clear that the crypto ecosystem is tightly interconnected, as many smaller traders, lenders, and DeFi (decentralized finance) protocols have concentrated exposures to these big players.
Finally, we have seen how decentralized lending, which relies on overcollateralization to substitute for intermediation, can serve as a stress amplifier by creating waves of liquidations as prices fall.
3
Same Risk, Same Regulatory Outcome
The recent turbulence and losses among retail investors in crypto highlight the urgent need to ensure compliance with existing regulations and to fill any gaps where regulations or enforcement may need to be tailored—for instance, for decentralized protocols and platforms. As we consider how to address the potential future financial stability risks of the evolving crypto financial system, it is important to start with strong basic regulatory foundations. A good macroprudential framework builds on a solid foundation of microprudential regulation. Future financial resilience will be greatly enhanced if we ensure the regulatory perimeter encompasses the crypto financial system and reflects the principle of same risk, same disclosure, same regulatory outcome. By extending the perimeter and applying like regulatory outcomes and like transparency to like risks, it will enable regulators to more effectively address risks within crypto markets and potential risks posed by crypto markets to the broader financial system. Strong guardrails for safety and soundness, market integrity, and investor and consumer protection will help ensure that new digital finance products, platforms, and activities are based on genuine economic value and not on regulatory evasion, which ultimately leaves investors more exposed than they may appreciate.
Due to the cross-sectoral and cross-border scope of crypto platforms, exchanges, and activities, it is important that regulators work together domestically and internationally to maintain a stable financial system and address regulatory evasion. The same-risk-same-regulatory-outcome principle guides the Financial Stability Board's work on stablecoins, crypto-assets, and DeFi; the Basel consultation on the prudential treatment of crypto-assets; the work by the International Organization of Securities Commissions' FinTech network; the work by federal bank regulatory agencies on the appropriate treatment of crypto activities at U.S. banks; and a host of other international and domestic work.
4
In implementing a same-risk-same-regulatory-outcome principle, we should start by ensuring basic protections are in place for consumers and investors. Retail users should be protected against exploitation, undisclosed conflicts of interest, and market manipulation—risks to which they are particularly vulnerable, according to a host of research.
5
If investors lack these basic protections, these markets will be vulnerable to runs.
Second, since trading platforms play a critical role in crypto-asset markets, it is important to address noncompliance and any gaps that may exist. We have seen crypto-trading platforms and crypto-lending firms not only engage in activities similar to those in traditional finance without comparable regulatory compliance, but also combine activities that are required to be separated in traditional financial markets. For example, some platforms combine market infrastructure and client facilitation with risk-taking businesses like asset creation, proprietary trading, venture capital, and lending.
Third, all financial institutions, whether in traditional finance or crypto finance, must comply with the rules designed to combat money laundering and financing of terrorism and to support economic sanctions. Platforms and exchanges should be designed in a manner that facilitates and supports compliance with these laws. The permissionless exchange of assets and tools that obscure the source of funds not only facilitate evasion, but also increase the risk of theft, hacks, and ransom attacks. These risks are particularly prominent in decentralized exchanges that are designed to avoid the use of intermediaries responsible for know-your-customer identification and that may require adaptations to ensure compliance at this most foundational layer.
6
Finally, it is important to address any regulatory gaps and to adapt existing approaches to novel technologies. While regulatory frameworks clearly apply to DeFi activities no less than to centralized crypto activities and traditional finance, DeFi protocols may present novel challenges that may require adapting existing approaches.
7
The peer-to-peer nature of these activities, their automated nature, the immutability of code once deployed to the blockchain, the exercise of governance functions through tokens in decentralized autonomous organizations, the absence of validated identities, and the dispersion or obfuscation of control may make it challenging to hold intermediaries accountable. It is not yet clear that digital native approaches, such as building in automated incentives for undertaking governance responsibilities, are adequate alternatives.
Connections to the Core Financial Institutions
There are two specific areas that merit heightened attention because of heightened risks of spillovers to the core financial system: bank involvement in crypto activities and stablecoins. To date, crypto has not become sufficiently interconnected with the core financial system to pose broad systemic risk. But it is likely regulators will continue to face calls for supervised banking institutions to play a role in these markets.
Bank regulators will need to weigh competing considerations in assessing bank involvement in crypto activities ranging from custody to issuance to customer facilitation. Bank involvement provides an interface where regulators have strong sightlines and can help ensure strong protections. Similarly, regulators are drawn to approaches that effectively subject the crypto intermediaries that resemble complex bank organizations to bank-like regulation. But bringing risks from crypto into the heart of the financial system without the appropriate guardrails could increase the potential for spillovers and has uncertain implications for the stability of the system. It is important for banks to engage with beneficial innovation and upgrade capabilities in digital finance, but until there is a strong regulatory framework for crypto finance, bank involvement might further entrench a riskier and less compliant ecosystem.
Private Digital Currencies and Central Bank Digital Currencies
Stablecoins represent a second area with a heightened risk of spillovers. Currently, stablecoins are positioned as the digital native asset that bridges from the crypto financial system to fiat. This role is important because fiat currency is referenced as the unit of account for the crypto financial system.
8
Stablecoins are currently the settlement asset of choice on and across crypto platforms, often serving as collateral for lending and trading activity. As highlighted by large recent outflows from the largest stablecoin, stablecoins pegged to fiat currency are highly vulnerable to runs. For these reasons, it is vital that stablecoins that purport to be redeemable at par in fiat currency on demand are subject to the types of prudential regulation that limit the risk of runs and payment system vulnerabilities that such private monies have exhibited historically.
Well-regulated stablecoins might bring additional competition to payments, but they introduce other risks. There is a risk of fragmentation of stablecoin networks into walled gardens. Conversely, there is a risk that a single dominant stablecoin might emerge, given the winner-takes-all dynamics in such activities. Indeed, the market is currently highly concentrated among three dominant stablecoins, and it risks becoming even more concentrated in the future. The top three stablecoins account for almost 90 percent of transactions, and the top two of these account for 80 percent of market capitalization.
9
Given the foundational role of fiat currency, there may be an advantage for future financial stability to having a digital native form of safe central bank money—a central bank digital currency. A digital native form of safe central bank money could enhance stability by providing the neutral trusted settlement layer in the future crypto financial system.
10
A settlement layer with a digital native central bank money could, for instance, facilitate interoperability among well-regulated stablecoins designed for a variety of use cases and enable private-sector provision of decentralized, customized, and automated financial products. This development would be a natural evolution of the complementarity between the public and private sectors in payments, ensuring strong public trust in the one-for-one redeemability of commercial bank money and stablecoins for safe central bank money.
11
Building in Risk Management and Compliance
Crypto and fintech have introduced competition and put the focus on how innovation can help increase inclusion and address other vexing problems in finance today. Slow and costly payments particularly affect lower-income households with precarious cash flows who rely on remittances or miss bills waiting on paychecks. Many hard-working individuals cannot obtain credit to start businesses or to respond to an emergency.
But while innovation and competition can reduce costs in finance, some costs are necessary to keep the system safe.
12
Intermediaries earn revenues in exchange for safely providing important services. Someone must bear the costs of evaluating risk, maintaining resources to support those risks through good times and bad, complying with laws that prevent crime and terrorism, and serving less sophisticated customers fairly and without exploitation. In the current crypto ecosystem, often no one is bearing these costs. So when a service appears cheaper or more efficient, it is important to understand whether this benefit is due to genuine innovation or regulatory noncompliance.
So as these activities evolve, it is worth considering whether there are new ways to achieve regulatory objectives in the context of new technology. Distributed ledgers, smart contracts, and digital identities may allow new forms of risk management that shift the distribution of costs. Perhaps in a more decentralized financial system, new approaches can be designed to make protocol developers and transaction validators accountable for ensuring financial products are safe and compliant.
Conclusion
Innovation has the potential to make financial services faster, cheaper, and more inclusive and to do so in ways that are native to the digital ecosystem. Enabling responsible innovation to flourish will require that the regulatory perimeter encompass the crypto financial system according to the principle of like risk, like regulatory outcome, and that novel risks associated with the new technologies be appropriately addressed. It is important that the foundations for sound regulation of the crypto financial system be established now before the crypto ecosystem becomes so large or interconnected that it might pose risks to the stability of the broader financial system.
1. I am grateful to Joseph Cox and Molly Mahar of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. The views expressed here address broad principles from a financial stability perspective across the financial system and not specific regulations. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. See, for example, the discussion in section 2 of Financial Stability Board (2022),
Assessment of Risks to Financial Stability from Crypto-assets
(PDF)
(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, February).
Return to text
3. Most decentralized lending protocols require loans to remain overcollateralized, with loans that fall below specific thresholds subject to automatic liquidations. These liquidations can have a persistent effect on asset prices, which often triggers further liquidations. See preliminary research in Alfred Lehar and Christine A. Parlour (2022), "
Systemic Fragility in Decentralized Markets (PDF)
," unpublished paper, June 13.
Return to text
4. See, for example, Financial Stability Board (2022),
Assessment of Risks to Financial Stability from Crypto-assets
(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, February); Financial Stability Board (2020),
Regulation, Supervision and Oversight of "Global Stablecoin" Arrangements
(PDF)
(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, October); Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2022), "
Consultative Document: Second Consultation on the Prudential Treatment of Cryptoasset Exposures (PDF)
" (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, June); and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2021), "
Joint Statement on Crypto-Asset Policy Sprint Initiative and Next Steps
," joint press release, November 23.
Return to text
5. See, for example, Philip Daian, Steven Goldfeder, Tyler Kell, Yunqi Li, Xueyuan Zhao, Iddo Bentov, Lorenz Breidenbach, and Ari Juels (2019), "
Flash Boys 2.0: Frontrunning, Transaction Reordering, and Consensus Instability in Decentralized Exchanges (PDF)
," unpublished paper, Cornell University, arXiv, April; Raphael Auer, Jon Frost, and Jose María Vidal Pastor (2022), "
Miners as Intermediaries: Extractable Value and Market Manipulation in Crypto and DeFi (PDF)
," BIS Bulletin 58 (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, June); Paul Barnes (2018), "Crypto Currency and Its Susceptibility to Speculative Bubbles Manipulation, Scams and Fraud,"
Journal of Advanced Studies in Finance
,
vol. 9 (Winter), pp. 60–77; and Felix Eigelshoven, André Ullrich, and Douglas Parry (2021), "Cryptocurrency Market Manipulation—A Systematic Literature Review," in
ICIS 2021 Proceedings on "Building Sustainability and Resilience with IS: A Call for Action
"
(Austin, Tex.: International Conference on Information Systems, Dec. 12–15).
Return to text
6. The Russian invasion of Ukraine has raised questions about the use of crypto-asset markets for sanctions evasion. See, for example, comments by Carol House, the director of cybersecurity for the National Security Council: "The scale that the Russian state would need to successfully circumvent all U.S. and partners' financial sanctions would almost certainly render cryptocurrency as an ineffective primary tool for the state" (as quoted in Hannah Lang (2022), "U.S. Lawmakers Push Treasury to Ensure Russia Cannot Use Cryptocurrency to Avoid Sanctions," Reuters, March 2, para. 7).
Return to text
7. See Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2022),
IOSCO Decentralized Finance Report: Public Report
(PDF)
(Madrid: OICV-IOSCO, March).
Return to text
8. See Bank for International Settlements (2022), "
The Future Monetary System
," in
Annual Economic Report 2022
(Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June).
Return to text
9. See The Block (2022), "Share of Trade Volume by Pair Denomination," data as of June from CryptoCompare, https://www.theblock.co/data/crypto-markets/spot/share-of-trade-volume-by-pair-denomination; Martin Young
(2022), "Circle
'
s USDC Stablecoin Gobbles Tether
'
s Market Share with 50B Milestone," Cointelegraph,
February 1, https://cointelegraph.com/news/circle-s-usdc-stablecoin-gobbles-tether-s-market-share-with-50b-milestone; and
Brian Newar
(2022), "USDC's 'Real Volume' Flips Tether on Ethereum as Total Supply Hits 55.9B," Cointelegraph,
June 22, https://cointelegraph.com/news/usdc-s-real-volume-flips-tether-on-ethereum-as-total-supply-hits-55-9b.
Return to text
10. See Lael Brainard (2022), "
Digital Assets and the Future of Finance: Examining the Benefits and Risks of a U.S. Central Bank Digital Currency
,"
statement before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, May 26.
Return to text
11. With respect to the United States, no decision has been made about whether or not a central bank digital currency will be issued.
Return to text
12. See Igor Makarov and Antoinette Schoar (2022), "
Cryptocurrencies and Decentralized Finance (DeFi) (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
BPEA Conference Draft, March 24–25.
Return to text


Discurso 49
==================================================
June 17, 2022
Welcoming Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the "International Roles of the U.S. Dollar," a research conference sponsored by  the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good morning, and welcome to the inaugural conference on the International Roles of the U.S. Dollar. Thank you all for participating and for lending your expertise on this important topic. This conference marks the first use of our new Martin Conference Center, which I hope you enjoy.
The international financial and monetary system that emerged after World War II has been defined by the centrality of the dollar. It is the world's reserve currency and the most widely used for payments and investments. As outlined in recent work by Board staff, this global preeminence has been supported by the depth and liquidity of U.S. financial markets, the size and strength of the U.S. economy, its stability and openness to trade and capital flows, and international trust in U.S. institutions and the rule of law.
1
Professor Barry Eichengreen will expand on some of these themes later this morning.
The dollar's international role holds multiple benefits. For the United States, it lowers transaction fees and borrowing costs for U.S. households, businesses, and the government. Its ubiquity helps contain uncertainty and, relatedly, the cost of hedging for domestic households and businesses. For foreign economies, the wide use of the dollar allows borrowers to have access to a broad pool of lenders and investors, which reduces their funding and transaction costs. The benefits of the dollar as the dominant reserve currency have generated an extensive academic literature. Yesterday's paper on the Treasury market by Alexandra Tabova and Frank Warnock extends that work in meaningful ways.
The Federal Reserve's strong commitment to our price stability mandate contributes to the widespread confidence in the dollar as a store of value. To that end, my colleagues and I are acutely focused on returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. Meeting our dual mandate also depends on maintaining financial stability. The Fed's commitment to both our dual mandate and financial stability encourages the international community to hold and use dollars.
The wide use of the dollar globally can also pose financial stability challenges that can materially affect households, businesses, and markets. For that reason, the Federal Reserve has played a key role in promoting financial stability and supporting the use of dollars internationally through our liquidity facilities. The central bank liquidity swap lines provide foreign central banks with the capacity to deliver U.S. dollar funding to institutions in their jurisdictions. And the Foreign and International Monetary Authorities (FIMA) Repo Facility allows approved FIMA account holders the option to temporarily exchange their U.S. Treasury securities held by the Federal Reserve for U.S. dollars. These facilities serve as liquidity backstops so that holders of dollar assets and participants in dollar funding markets can be confident that strains will be eased when these markets come under stress. That assurance, in turn, mitigates the effect of such strains on the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. Both facilities enhance the standing of the dollar as the dominant global currency.
The swap lines were extensively used during the Global Financial Crisis, the 2011 euro-area debt crisis, and the financial turmoil at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. The paper on central bank swap lines presented yesterday by Gerardo Ferrara, Philippe Mueller, Ganesh Viswanath-Natraj, and Junxuan Wang provides novel micro-level evidence on the usefulness of swap lines in providing cross-border liquidity to support the real economy.
Looking forward, rapid changes are taking place in the global monetary system that may affect the international role of the dollar in the future. Most major economies already have or are in the process of developing instant, 24/7 payments. Our own FedNow service will be coming online in 2023. And in light of the tremendous growth in crypto-assets and stablecoins, the Federal Reserve is examining whether a U.S. central bank digital currency (CBDC) would improve on an already safe and efficient domestic payments system. As the Fed's white paper on this topic notes, a U.S. CBDC could also potentially help maintain the dollar's international standing.
2
As we consider feedback from the paper, we will be thinking not just about the current state of the world, but also how the global financial system might evolve over the next 5 to 10 years. The paper by Jiakai Chen and Asani Sarkar, which is on today's program, and our distinguished panelists on this topic this afternoon, will provide important insights on this issue.
To summarize, I would like to stress the importance of the dollar to the U.S. and global economies and financial markets. It is critical that we understand the channels, connections, and effects of the role of the dollar.
In closing, I want to thank you all for taking the time to join our discussion on the dollar's international roles. This conference brings together world-class researchers, practitioners, and policymakers dedicated to understanding and addressing these vital issues. I look forward to their insights and I hope you enjoy the conference.
1. See Carol Bertaut, Bastian von Beschwitz, and Stephanie Curcuru (2021), "
The International Role of the U.S. Dollar
," FEDS Note (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 6).
Return to text
2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021),
Money and Payments: The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation
(PDF)
(Washington: Board of Governors, January).
Return to text


Discurso 50
==================================================
May 25, 2022
Commencement Remarks
Vice Chair Lael Brainard
At the 2022 Commencement of the School for Advanced International Studies, Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C.
Share
Watch Live
It is an honor to be here today. Thank you, Dean Steinberg, members of the faculty and staff, members of the Board, distinguished guests, parents, and family members. To the Class of 2022, congratulations. I am honored to be here with you to celebrate this day for which you have worked so hard and on which you go out to make your mark in the world, fortified with an incredible intellectual arsenal and lifelong friends from your time at the Johns Hopkins School for Advanced International Studies (SAIS). As a parent, I would like to extend a special welcome to the parents and families who have joined this celebration today. I'm sure many of you must be filled, like I am often, with awe and admiration for our amazing offspring and the good they will do in the world.
To be honest, when Dean Steinberg invited me to speak, I was concerned that you might not be excited to hear from a central banker. Central bankers are dull by design. We use 17 words when 2 would suffice. We make a virtue of using language that is prosaic and concrete. Our pronouncements are carefully calibrated so they are understood exactly as intended, leaving nothing to the imagination. In short, we are the opposite of the poetry, drama, and inspiration that are the stuff of launching gifted graduates on their career quest.
But a friend reminded me that if there's anywhere a central banker might be a good fit for graduation, it's SAIS. At SAIS, you are required to not only take, but
pass
monetary theory. No doubt your parents must be wondering—monetary theory? How is that going to help your career? Is it too late to become a doctor or a lawyer?
But that is the point. You have chosen a different path. Two years ago, when a novel coronavirus struck, when fear and panic spread, you decided you wanted to learn more. When economies and markets struggled, you chose to focus on developing solutions. When travel and trade trickled to a stop, you made a commitment to a life in global affairs.
You have endured lockdowns and Zoom lectures to get an education that will help you understand and address the complexities of our world. Your generation has had to show resilience and strength in the face of a once-in-a-hundred-year pandemic and prepare for a world where once-in-a-hundred-year events occur every couple of years. That strength and learning will serve you well as you embark on your life's work.
As you do so, I hope some of you are considering a career in public service. Others, not so much. I get it. Public service is not glamorous. Still, I hope many of you will consider devoting a part of your life's work to a public mission and will do so with enthusiasm and urgency, because public service has a profound effect on the lives of people and communities across the country. And it can be motivating and satisfying in ways that are rare.
So perhaps I could provide a glimpse of the hopes and dreams that animate my journey and guide my work, as a reminder that you can and must dream big and stay true to your chosen mission as you navigate your journey with as much passion as professionalism and as much integrity as intellect.
So let me start by tracing back what I do today to what I cared about when I was a young American growing up in Europe. Ever since I was a little girl observing life in Poland under Soviet rule, I have been making mental checklists of the communities around me: gray apartment block with cratered walls and broken glass, dilapidated factory with an open furnace, long line at the bread shop.
I noticed the contrast between the bright colors and bustle of the farmers selling produce from their own plots of land and the gray bleakness of communist factories and poorly stocked shelves. And the even greater contrast with West Germany at a time when it was fast integrating with its western neighbors: new cars, thriving small businesses, packed store shelves. What I observed around me as I came of age, I later understood, were features of the Cold War battle over the ideals of freedom and enterprise and the kind of political systems and institutions that could best uphold those ideals.
In those early days it was hard to imagine the rise of Solidarity and the fall of the wall. Three decades later, it is inspiring to stand with a united and free Europe as it opposes Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine.
Once I started working, I found myself compiling these checklists in Maggie Thatcher's industrial towns, in auto assembly plants in Detroit, in financial-crisis-stricken Mexico City, in agricultural towns in Senegal. Whether I am on vacation or a community visit, I read neighborhoods the way that some people survey land for planting or spreadsheets for weak links or legal briefs for inconsistencies: boarded up rowhouse, not a grocery store in sight, multilane highway splitting the old commercial district.
As I have traveled around this country from Milwaukee to the Mississippi Delta, from Atlanta to Appalachia, from Detroit to the Colonias, and from Scranton to the Pine Ridge Reservation, in urban and rural areas alike, it is striking how much the opportunities and challenges facing families are shaped by the health of their communities and the broader economy. At the most foundational level, what animates my job at our nation's central bank is the opportunity to lift up the livelihoods and lives of working families in communities across America.
As central bankers, we don't think of inflation or unemployment as blue or red. We focus on data and proven solutions, and our mission is to serve all Americans.
We see time and time again that the families that have the smallest financial buffers and the communities with the least resilience suffer the most when turbulence strikes. The risk that turbulence will strike is always present, as I have learned from the many financial crises that have punctuated my own career. In the past decade alone, our communities have contended with the devastation of the Global Financial Crisis, the European Debt Crisis, the COVID-19 pandemic, and now the burden on stretched household budgets from Russia's war of aggression against Ukraine.
The arc from the collapse of the Berlin Wall to the response to the COVID-19 pandemic is this: Ideas and actions can change the course of communities and countries. Let me share with you three examples of how individuals have come together to shape policy for the greater good.
Ninety years ago, the first woman Cabinet Secretary, Frances Perkins, convinced a skeptical Franklin Roosevelt that unemployment insurance wasn't a handout but a smart investment. Not only would it be an effective self-financed approach to help families smooth through periods when work was hard to find through no fault of their own, but it also would support the health of the broader economy when demand weakened.
So, two years ago, when a global pandemic struck, the application of Perkins's logic through an expanded set of programs and facilities sustained millions of families and saved countless small businesses. After returning from a meeting in Europe in late February 2020 when COVID was starting to spread globally, I had a startling realization that these are the moments we are here for, when communities around the country rely on us to act. With a shocking 20 million Americans laid off from their jobs in one short month, with U.S. stock market capitalization down by 12 percent in one day, with main street businesses shuttering and 94 percent of classes moving to distance learning, it was vital to respond with boldness and creativity as we committed to using all our tools to provide vital support for communities around the country.
In contrast to the devastation wrought by the inaction in the lead-up to the Great Depression, the COVID response showed that swift, decisive action can stave off catastrophe. When there is the will to do so, with the support of Congress, we can and must use our tools to help protect families, businesses, and their communities from crisis and make the broader economy more resilient so it rebounds faster.
The second example is of Augustus Hawkins, a Black Congressman who in the 1970s was a key architect of the statute enshrining the words "full employment" in the Federal Reserve's mandate along with price stability. He knew that only with maximum employment would there be true opportunity for workers of all races, ethnicities, and genders. Every day, I am mindful that the opportunities and prosperity of working people all across the country rest in part on our commitment to the prosaic words "maximum employment and price stability," which, like policy work itself, belie the enormity of their effect.
Maximum employment and stable low inflation benefit all Americans but are particularly important for those earning less. Price stability is of greatest importance for lower-income families because they spend more than three-quarters of their paychecks on essentials like groceries, gas or bus fare, and rent—more than double the 31 percent spent by higher-income households. High inflation is our most pressing challenge. That is why we are taking strong actions that will bring inflation back down.
The third example took place 45 years ago, when civil rights leaders, banks, and community groups worked together with leaders in Congress to enact the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). To address the damaging legacy from redlining—the practice of restricting access to credit in neighborhoods, often on demographic grounds—Congress assigned banking regulators with the responsibility to ensure banks serve the credit needs of their entire communities. As of today, this responsibility remains the foundation of the ecosystem supporting credit, investment, and financial inclusion in communities that face the greatest challenges. By revitalizing the CRA, we provide shopkeepers, entrepreneurs, first-time homebuyers, and families better opportunities to thrive individually and, in turn, to contribute to the broader vibrancy of our economy.
A commitment to mission, to providing opportunities in all communities, to embracing change, to taking bold action—these guidelines that have been important for me may also be important for you as you embark on your professional journey. They will be important whether you work in the public, private, or nonprofit sector, and whether you work within borders or across them.
I noted that in the early days, the demise of the Iron Curtain was virtually inconceivable. But when the tides turned, the change came hard and fast. The digital revolution similarly heralded a recognition at a visceral level that we were hurtling toward a new era.
Your generation is experiencing change of this magnitude at a breathtaking pace. We are living through a profound shift in our individual and collective histories. This great reordering gives you a unique opportunity to shape what comes next. You are headed into the world at the exact moment that your ability to change it has never been more important. You understand the need to embrace change—to understand it and shape it, not hide from it.
And you came to the right place to do so. SAIS was founded in 1943—during World War II. It was established one year before the Bretton Woods Conference, two years before the United Nations was established, and four years before the National Security Council first met. SAIS was established during a crisis to enable its graduates to make a better world. Sound familiar?
As SAIS graduates, you are equipped with an intellectual framework that enables you to work across disciplines as much as within them, at both a national and global level. I guarantee that no challenge worthy of your attention will be simple. The challenges your generation faces are multifaceted, requiring you to think and act across disciplinary boundaries to develop effective solutions.
As SAIS graduates, you understand that whatever your professional calling may be—whether in finance or technology or development or diplomacy—you are called to do so by a mission that animates you and that holds its own inspiration and poetry for you.
As SAIS graduates, you are supremely well positioned to combine theory and practice in the arena and to be nimble and agile in adapting to even the most extreme events. You will have your own moment when you realize with startling clarity that you are called to act with boldness and resolve. I encountered two groups of people when I was navigating the aftershocks of the Global Financial Crisis and the complexities of the European Debt Crisis: SAIS graduates I worked
with
, and SAIS graduates I worked
for
. They were excellent, dedicated, and inspiring. So, I am confident that your education here has equipped you well to understand and act on the big forces that will continue to drive change.
Finally, as SAIS graduates, you embark on your professional journey equipped not only with a powerful intellectual framework but a lifelong network of friends, mentors, and collaborators here and around the world that will sustain and support you as you rise to meet challenges that may be impossible to even imagine right now. Indeed, this SAIS community may turn out to be the greatest gift of your time here.
So let me conclude by saying to each of you and to your families: Congratulations, and Godspeed.


Discurso 51
==================================================
May 24, 2022
Welcoming Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Reservation Economic Summit 2022 hosted by the National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development, Las Vegas, Nevada (via prerecorded video)
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good morning, and welcome. It is a great pleasure to welcome all the attendees to RES 2022.
The National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development has been a strong and consistent partner to the Federal Reserve, collaborating with us on small business COVID surveys, serving on the Leadership Council for the Minneapolis Fed’s Center for Indian Country Development, and moderating our policy webinar series on tribal enterprise diversification, just to name a few.
Trust is earned and developed through relationships. This is particularly important in Indian Country. The Federal Reserve has built an enduring and sturdy bond with the National Center, and we value that partnership.
We are excited to be participating in this year’s conference, learning alongside you. There is undoubtedly more research and engagement to be done on the specific and unique economic needs of tribal nations and Indigenous communities. RES 2022 is a great meeting ground for such collaboration.
The best insight and analysis come from people who live and work in communities and have an inside view of the struggles and opportunities within. The Federal Reserve System has made a priority of engaging with leaders and stakeholders on opportunities most relevant to tribal economic prosperity. For example, input from tribal stakeholders has been invaluable to informing the important work of modernizing the Community Reinvestment Act, which was incorporated into the recently published proposal that we are looking forward to getting comments on. We also value the growing representation of tribal voices on our boards of directors and advisory councils at Reserve Banks, helping us to better understand economic conditions in Indian Country.
Many of you are aware of the Center for Indian Country Development (CICD), our national institute dedicated to helping tribes reach their full economic potential. We are excited to be expanding its capacity to conduct economic research and data analysis to support the long-term economic prosperity of Indian Country, in partnership with Indian Country. We look forward to CICD’s ongoing collaboration with tribal communities on research and data.
Additionally, an initial St. Louis Fed partnership with the Osage Nation, to provide youth financial education, has led to partnerships with tribal governments across the country that provide personal finance education, often in their Native languages. Tribal leaders nationwide have also joined recent listening sessions to discuss the impacts of inflation. Similar sessions were held on our pandemic response facilities, which were adapted after hearing their input.
Other Federal Reserve partnerships with Indian Country include initiatives on access to credit; Native community development financial institutions; financial education programs tailored to early childhood, secondary, and higher education; workforce development; housing; social services; and elder programs.
And as part of our ongoing effort to deepen our understanding of tribal economies, last year, the Federal Reserve Board announced that we had joined the Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion, along with the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Bank of Canada, and the Reserve Bank of Australia. This is part of our commitment to learning best practices and expanding our international partnerships with central banks that are similarly invested in supporting Indigenous people and communities.
The Federal Reserve works for all of us, and our research and analysis must reflect the specific needs and circumstances of all of our communities. I am grateful for our partnership with the National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development, and I want to thank you, as well as all our colleagues, advisors, and stakeholders who help us work toward a stable and inclusive economy for all.
Thank you.


Discurso 52
==================================================
May 24, 2022
Welcoming Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Reservation Economic Summit 2022 hosted by the National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development, Las Vegas, Nevada (via prerecorded video)
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good morning, and welcome. It is a great pleasure to welcome all the attendees to RES 2022.
The National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development has been a strong and consistent partner to the Federal Reserve, collaborating with us on small business COVID surveys, serving on the Leadership Council for the Minneapolis Fed’s Center for Indian Country Development, and moderating our policy webinar series on tribal enterprise diversification, just to name a few.
Trust is earned and developed through relationships. This is particularly important in Indian Country. The Federal Reserve has built an enduring and sturdy bond with the National Center, and we value that partnership.
We are excited to be participating in this year’s conference, learning alongside you. There is undoubtedly more research and engagement to be done on the specific and unique economic needs of tribal nations and Indigenous communities. RES 2022 is a great meeting ground for such collaboration.
The best insight and analysis come from people who live and work in communities and have an inside view of the struggles and opportunities within. The Federal Reserve System has made a priority of engaging with leaders and stakeholders on opportunities most relevant to tribal economic prosperity. For example, input from tribal stakeholders has been invaluable to informing the important work of modernizing the Community Reinvestment Act, which was incorporated into the recently published proposal that we are looking forward to getting comments on. We also value the growing representation of tribal voices on our boards of directors and advisory councils at Reserve Banks, helping us to better understand economic conditions in Indian Country.
Many of you are aware of the Center for Indian Country Development (CICD), our national institute dedicated to helping tribes reach their full economic potential. We are excited to be expanding its capacity to conduct economic research and data analysis to support the long-term economic prosperity of Indian Country, in partnership with Indian Country. We look forward to CICD’s ongoing collaboration with tribal communities on research and data.
Additionally, an initial St. Louis Fed partnership with the Osage Nation, to provide youth financial education, has led to partnerships with tribal governments across the country that provide personal finance education, often in their Native languages. Tribal leaders nationwide have also joined recent listening sessions to discuss the impacts of inflation. Similar sessions were held on our pandemic response facilities, which were adapted after hearing their input.
Other Federal Reserve partnerships with Indian Country include initiatives on access to credit; Native community development financial institutions; financial education programs tailored to early childhood, secondary, and higher education; workforce development; housing; social services; and elder programs.
And as part of our ongoing effort to deepen our understanding of tribal economies, last year, the Federal Reserve Board announced that we had joined the Central Bank Network for Indigenous Inclusion, along with the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Bank of Canada, and the Reserve Bank of Australia. This is part of our commitment to learning best practices and expanding our international partnerships with central banks that are similarly invested in supporting Indigenous people and communities.
The Federal Reserve works for all of us, and our research and analysis must reflect the specific needs and circumstances of all of our communities. I am grateful for our partnership with the National Center for American Indian Enterprise Development, and I want to thank you, as well as all our colleagues, advisors, and stakeholders who help us work toward a stable and inclusive economy for all.
Thank you.


Discurso 53
==================================================
April 05, 2022
Variation in the Inflation Experiences of Households
Governor Lael Brainard
At the Spring 2022 Institute Research Conference, Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
It is a pleasure to join you to discuss differences in how households at different income levels experience inflation.
1
I look forward to hearing from the panelists, who are doing important and interesting research on this topic.
By law, the Federal Reserve is assigned the responsibility to pursue price stability and maximum employment. The Federal Open Market Committee (the Committee) has long recognized the connection between stable, low inflation and maximum employment. Forty years ago, Paul Volcker noted that the dual mandate isn't an either-or proposition and that runaway inflation "would be the greatest threat to the continuing growth of the economy… and ultimately, to employment."
2
Maximum employment and stable, low inflation benefit all Americans, but are particularly important for low- and moderate-income families. The combination of good job opportunities and stable, low inflation provides purchasing power to fill up gas tanks and grocery carts and pay housing and medical costs, leaving room to build emergency cushions and invest in education; retirement; and, for some, small businesses. Indeed, the Employment Act of 1946 called on the federal government to promote "maximum employment, production, and purchasing power."
3
While national data do not directly disaggregate the differential effects of inflation by household income groups, a variety of evidence suggests that lower-income households disproportionately feel the burden of high inflation. Lower-income families expend a greater share of their income on necessities; have smaller financial cushions; and may have less ability to switch to lower-priced alternatives. Arthur Burns noted in the late 1960s that "there can be little doubt that poor people…are the chief sufferers of inflation."
4
Today, inflation is very high, particularly for food and gasoline. All Americans are confronting higher prices, but the burden is particularly great for households with more limited resources. That is why getting inflation down is our most important task, while sustaining a recovery that includes everyone. This is vital to sustaining the purchasing power of American families.
Whose Cost of Living?
In assessing inflation faced by American consumers, economists and policymakers generally rely on the change in the consumer price index (CPI) or the change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE).
5
Since January 2012, the Committee's price-stability goal has been specified as a longer-run goal of 2 percent in terms of annual PCE inflation.
6
Both CPI and PCE inflation metrics are assembled from a collection of underlying elementary price indexes for narrow subsets of goods and services.
7
The price changes each month for the goods and services in these subsets are combined into measures of overall inflation by calculating a weighted average of all these subindexes, where the weights are based on average aggregate consumer expenditures in each category.
Using a national average of consumer expenditures to weight the categories has intuitive appeal. This measure is particularly useful, for example, in adjusting measures of overall expenditure for changes in prices to determine how much real growth has occurred between two periods. However, using a national average of expenditures to weight the categories has limitations when it comes to representing the true cost of living experienced by different types of households.
U.S. Households Have Different Inflation Experiences
Each household in the United States has a particular consumption bundle whose prices and quantities combine to make up that household's cost of living. If we could start with each individual household's cost of living and aggregate across households by giving equal weight to each household, it would create an economy-wide cost-of-living index. The change in such a cost-of-living index would represent the average inflation experienced by U.S. households. Instead, because the CPI and PCE indexes weight every dollar of expenditure equally, these indexes implicitly weight each household's cost of living proportionally to their total expenditure.
8
Since lower-income households represent a relatively smaller share of overall expenditure, the inflation associated with their consumption baskets is underrepresented in the official consumer price indexes.
It would be useful to have data about consumer inflation broken out by demographic groups, similar to labor market and personal-income data, in order to assess the differential effect of inflation across different groups of households.
9
U.S. statistical agencies do not collect the information needed to accurately assess inflation at a household level, and it would require a large change in the way these agencies go about their work to do so. Nonetheless, recent research has begun to assess variation in the ways different households experience inflation.
Households at different income levels could experience differential inflation effects for several reasons: Consumption shares could differ systematically for low- and high-income households; the goods and services within each consumption category could differ; the ability to substitute for lower-priced alternatives of the same item could differ; and prices paid for the same good could differ systematically due to differences in access. I will briefly touch on these four reasons.
First, low- and moderate-income households could experience inflation that diverges from the average because their consumption baskets differ systematically from the average.
10
Lower-income households spend 77 percent of their income on necessities—more than double the 31 percent of income spent by higher-income households on these categories.
11
Several studies have found that the consumption baskets of lower-income households have experienced higher-than-average inflation rates over time. Research from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has examined the effect of different consumption baskets by using the same elementary price indexes as used in the official CPI but assigning the weights of these components to reflect the consumption bundles of different types of households. A 2021 working paper by BLS staff based on data from 2003 to 2018 found that a price index reflecting the consumption basket for households in the lowest-income quartile grew
faster
than the overall CPI, while a price index reflecting the consumption basket for households in the highest-income quartile grew more
slowly
than the overall CPI.
12
A 2015 BLS study found a similar result using data from 1982 to 2014.
13
Of course, the recent sharp increases in inflation may have affected the consumption bundles of lower-income households relative to the average differently than in previous cycles.
While these studies allow for differences in the weighting of price indexes across different income groups, they rely on the same elementary price indexes for subcategories of goods and services. As a result, they may miss additional sources of variation in the inflation rates experienced by households at different income levels.
This consideration brings us to the second point: Households with different levels of income may purchase significantly different items even within the same elementary index categories for goods and services. To take an extreme example, caviar and canned tuna are both in the same elementary index. The demand and supply dynamics for those products are likely quite different, meaning that their relative price dynamics are poorly described by a single index.
Third, households at different income levels may have differing abilities to substitute for lower-priced alternatives within an elementary category. Consider a price increase for a breakfast cereal that increases the prices of both the brand-name cereal and the corresponding lower-priced store-brand cereal but maintains a differential between them. A household that had been purchasing brand-name cereal could save money by purchasing store-brand cereal instead, perhaps even eliminating any effect of the price increase on their actual spending while purchasing the same quantity of cereal in that narrow category. However, a household that was already purchasing the store brand would have to either absorb the increase in cost or consume less within that category.
Finally, beyond the variation in inflation that comes from households buying different goods, research also shows that differences in inflation can result from households paying different prices for identical goods. Using transaction-level data, researchers found that almost two-thirds of the variation in inflation across households comes from differences in prices paid for identical goods, with only about one-third coming from differences in the mix of goods within broad categories.
14
As a result of these differences, households with lower incomes, more household members, or older household heads experienced higher inflation on average. Variations in the prices paid for identical goods could reflect differences in the ability of some households to stock up when prices are discounted or to buy in bulk and save—options only available to households with the means to buy in larger quantities, adequate capacity to store larger quantities, or the flexibility to delay purchases if there is an opportunity to save in the future.
In addition, evidence suggests that inflation could be lower for items purchased online rather than from brick-and-mortar stores, suggesting that households who do not have full access to online shopping options could face a higher cost of living. One study of online transactions made between 2014 and 2017 found that online inflation averaged more than 1 percentage point per year lower than the equivalent CPI measure of the relevant product categories.
15
We are only beginning to understand the ways in which inflation experiences vary from household to household, how this variation correlates with income and demographic information, and how these divergent inflation experiences change over time.
16
This developing area of research will benefit from conferences like this one that help expand the frontier of our knowledge about the heterogeneity of experienced inflation.
Implications for the Outlook and Policy
High inflation places a burden on working families who are concerned about how far their paychecks will stretch as well as seniors living on fixed incomes. So now let me turn briefly to what we are seeing on inflation and the outlook for jobs and growth.
Headline PCE inflation for February came in at 6.4 percent on a 12-month basis. Food and energy account for an outsized one-fourth share of this high level of inflation and also constitute an outsized share of expenditure for lower-income Americans, who spend 26 percent of their income on food at home and transportation, compared with 9 percent for high-income Americans.
17
Core inflation is also elevated, and inflationary pressures have been broadening out. Housing contributed about one-tenth of total PCE inflation in February and is the single greatest category of expenditures by far for lower-income Americans, who spend 45 percent of their income on housing, compared to 18 percent for high-income Americans.
18
Durable goods inflation, particularly in autos, accounted for slightly more than one-fifth of total PCE inflation in February, representing a much greater contribution to inflation than was the case pre-pandemic. High durable goods inflation reflects pandemic-related supply constraints as well as persistently elevated demand associated with the pandemic. I will be carefully monitoring the extent to which demand rotates back to services and away from durable goods, where it has remained consistently above pre-pandemic levels, and the extent to which the services sector is able to absorb higher demand without generating undue inflationary pressure.
Russia's invasion of Ukraine is a human tragedy and a seismic geopolitical event. The global commodity supply shock associated with Russia's actions skews inflation risks to the upside and is expected to exacerbate high prices for gasoline and food as well as supply chain bottlenecks in goods sectors. The recent COVID lockdowns in China are also likely to extend bottlenecks.
These geopolitical events also pose downside risks to growth. That said, the U.S. economy entered this period of uncertainty with considerable momentum in demand and a strong labor market. As of the March labor report, payroll employment has increased at a pace of 600,000 jobs per month over the past six months, and the unemployment rate has fallen by a percentage point over that period and is now close to its pre-pandemic level. In contrast, until recently, the recovery in labor force participation was lagging far behind. So it is particularly noteworthy to see that the pandemic constraints on labor supply are diminishing for the prime-age workforce: The prime-age participation rate jumped 0.7 percentage points for women in March, following a similar-sized jump for men in February. An increase in labor supply associated with diminishing pandemic constraints combined with a moderation in demand associated with tightening financial conditions, slowing foreign growth, and a large decrease in fiscal support could be expected to reduce imbalances later in the year.
Against that backdrop, I will turn to policy. It is of paramount importance to get inflation down. Accordingly, the Committee will continue tightening monetary policy methodically through a series of interest rate increases and by starting to reduce the balance sheet at a rapid pace as soon as our May meeting. Given that the recovery has been considerably stronger and faster than in the previous cycle, I expect the balance sheet to shrink considerably more rapidly than in the previous recovery, with significantly larger caps and a much shorter period to phase in the maximum caps compared with 2017–19. The reduction in the balance sheet will contribute to monetary policy tightening over and above the expected increases in the policy rate reflected in market pricing and the Committee's Summary of Economic Projections. I expect the combined effect of rate increases and balance sheet reduction to bring the stance of policy to a more neutral position later this year, with the full extent of additional tightening over time dependent on how the outlook for inflation and employment evolves.
Our communications have resulted in broad market expectations for an expeditious increase in the policy rate toward a neutral level and a more rapid reduction in the balance sheet compared with 2017–19. Consistent with these expectations, we have already seen significant tightening in market financing conditions at longer maturities, which tend to be most relevant for household and business decisionmaking. For instance, 30-year mortgage rates have increased more than 100 basis points in just a few months and are now at levels last seen in late 2018.
Looking forward, at every meeting, we will have the opportunity to calibrate the appropriate pace of firming through the policy rate to reflect what the incoming data tell us about the outlook and the balance of risks. For today, every indicator of longer-term inflation expectations lies within the range of historical values consistent with our 2 percent target. On the other side, I am attentive to signals from the yield curve at different horizons and from other data that might suggest increased downside risks to activity. Currently, inflation is much too high and is subject to upside risks. The Committee is prepared to take stronger action if indicators of inflation and inflation expectations indicate that such action is warranted. We are committed to bringing inflation back down to its 2 percent target, recognizing that stable low inflation is vital to maintaining a strong economy and a labor market that works for everyone.
1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. Paul Volcker (1979),
interview on "The MacNeil/Lehrer Report" (PDF)
,
PBS,
October 10, p. 10.
Return to text
3. See the Declaration of Policy on page 1 of the Employment Act of 1946, available at
https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/files/docs/historical/congressional/employment-act-1946.pdf
.
Return to text
4. Quoted in John Palmer (1973),
Inflation, Unemployment, and Poverty
(Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books), as referenced in Alan Blinder and Howard Esaki (1978), "Macroeconomic Activity and Income Distribution in the Postwar United States,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 60 (November), pp. 604–9.
Return to text
5. CPI and PCE inflation generally move together but vary in important ways, including variations generated by differences in the scope of the purchases considered in the households' baskets, differences in the weights assigned to different categories of spending, and different formulas used to aggregate the underlying weighted price changes. For a recent comparison of CPI and PCE measures, see Noah Johnson (2017),
"A Comparison of PCE and CPI: Methodological Differences in U.S. Inflation Calculation and their Implications" (PDF)
, BLS Statistical Survey Paper (Washington: Bureau of Labor Statistics, November).
Return to text
6. The specific price-stability target of an inflation rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, was announced as part of the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy following the January 2012 Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting. For more information, see the current version of that statement at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf
as well as Chair Bernanke's discussion of the decision at the January 24, 2012, press conference:
https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20120125.pdf
. For additional information regarding the FOMC's preference for using a PCE-based measure of inflation, see the discussion of the change from CPI to PCE inflation projections in the February 2000
Monetary Policy Report
at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/hh/2000/february/fullreport.pdf#page=7
.
Return to text
7. According to the CPI section of the
Handbook of Methods,
the CPI survey collects about 94,000 prices per month to find prices in 243 basic item categories in 32 geographic areas, facilitating the creation of basic indexes for each of the resulting 7,776 item-area combinations that compose the CPI. See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020),
"Consumer Price Index"
Handbook of Methods
(Washington: BLS, November).
Return to text
8. These two approaches are referred to as the democratic and plutocratic indexes, respectively. For more information on the literature of cost-of-living measurement and plutocratic and democratic indexes, see Robert A. Pollak (1998), "The Consumer Price Index: A Research Agenda and Three Proposals,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 12 (1), pp. 69–78.
Return to text
9. See Austan Goolsbee (2021), "The Missing Data in the Inflation Debate,"
New York Times,
December 30, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/30/opinion/inflation-economy-biden-inequality.html.
Return to text
10. See Pew Charitable Trusts (2016),
Household Expenditures and Income
,
Issue Brief (Washington: Pew, March).
Return to text
11. The values for the share of income spent in each category were constructed using microdata from the 2020 Consumer Expenditure Interview Survey (CEX). For full-income reporters with strictly positive values for total expenditure and income after tax, the income share of expenditure in a given category is the ratio of expenditure in a given category to income after tax. The numbers reported are the sum of the median income share from each of the four categories, where each is defined as the weighted median of these ratios for households in the bottom and top quintiles of the income distribution. Consumption categories are defined as in the CEX.
Return to text
12. The study used data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey to construct a consumption basket for households in the lowest quartile of income as well as in the highest quartile of income. The authors calculated a Laspeyres index for the consumption basket of households in the lowest and highest income quartiles. From December 2003 to December 2018, the annualized percent change in the index for the lowest income quartile was 2.25 percent, and the annualized percent change in the index for the highest income quartile was 1.97 percent; the CPI-U had an annualized percentage change of 2.07 percent over that period. See Josh Klick and Anya Stockburger (2021),
"Experimental CPI for Lower and Higher Income Households" (PDF)
, BLS Working Paper 537 (Washington: Bureau of Labor Statistics, March).
Return to text
13. Three different baskets of "basic necessities" were considered in this study. The base experimental index included food, shelter, and clothing, and the additional two baskets included the components of the base index and added energy, and then both energy and medical care, respectively. During the period examined, the rate of overall consumer inflation was 2.78 percent, as measured by the regular CPI-U for All Items. In comparison, the base experimental index rose at an average annual rate of 2.91 percent from December 1982 to December 2014. The base-plus-energy experimental index increased at an average annual rate of 2.75 percent over the same period. The base-plus-energy-and-medical-care experimental index rose at an average annual rate of 2.99 percent during the same timeframe. See Jonathan Church (2015), "
The Cost of 'Basic Necessities' Has Risen Slightly More than Inflation over the Last 30 Years
,"
Beyond the Numbers: Prices & Spending
, vol. 4 (June), no. 10.
Return to text
14. See Greg Kaplan and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl (2017), "Inflation at the Household Level,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 91 (November), pp. 19–38. For a sample of 500 million transactions by about 50,000 U.S. households from 2004 to 2013, the authors found that over the nine years from the third quarter of 2004 through the third quarter of 2013, average inflation cumulates to 33 percent for households with incomes below $20,000 but to just 25 percent for households with incomes above $100,000.
This finding does not hold for housing, where a recent study found that housing inflation tends to be relatively similar across income quintiles, even though the share of income spent on housing varies considerably by income group. See table 2 and the related discussion in Daryl Larsen and Raven Malloy (2021), "
Differences in Rent Growth by Income 1985-2019 and Implications for Real Income Inequality
," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 5).
Return to text
15. The study used a matched set of entry-level item categories to create a digital price index (DPI) to compare with the equivalent CPI measure and found that overall DPI inflation is more than 1 percentage point per year lower than CPI inflation in those categories. Broken out by major groups, inflation was lower in the DPI than in the equivalent CPI in every category other than medicine and medical supplies. See Austan Goolsbee and Peter Klenow (2018), "Internet Rising, Prices Falling: Measuring Inflation in a World of E-Commerce,"
AEA Papers and Proceedings,
vol. 108 (May), pp. 488–92.
Return to text
16. For example, a recent study also suggests that the differential rates of inflation between low- and high-income households varies over the cycle: The gap between the inflation associated with goods purchased by lower-income households relative to higher-income households rises during recessions and narrows during recoveries. See David Argente and Munseob Lee (2021), “
Cost of Living Inequality During the Great Recession
,”
Journal of the European Economic Association
, vol. 19 (April), pp. 913–52. Another recent working paper documents that prices rise more for products purchased relatively more by low-income households (necessities) during recessions and that the aggregate share of spending devoted to necessities is countercyclical. See also Jacob Orchard (2022), “
Cyclical Demand Shifts and Cost of Living Inequality
,” SSRN Working Paper (Rochester, NY: SSRN, February 12).
Return to text
17. These statistics are based on the median income share in each category, defined as the weighted median of these ratios for households in the bottom and top quintiles of the income distribution; see footnote 11 for additional detail.
Return to text
18. These statistics are based on the median income share in each category, defined as the weighted median of these ratios for households in the bottom and top quintiles of the income distribution; see footnote 11 for additional detail.
Return to text


Discurso 54
==================================================
March 21, 2022
Restoring Price Stability
Chair Pro Tempore Jerome H. Powell
At "Policy Options for Sustainable and Inclusive Growth" 38th Annual Economic Policy Conference National Association for Business Economics, Washington, D.C.
Share
Watch Live
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
Let me first pause to recognize the millions who are suffering the tragic consequences of Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
At the Federal Reserve, our monetary policy is guided by the dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices. From that standpoint, the current picture is plain to see: The labor market is very strong, and inflation is much too high. My colleagues and I are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. There is an obvious need to move expeditiously to return the stance of monetary policy to a more neutral level, and then to move to more restrictive levels if that is what is required to restore price stability. We are committed to restoring price stability while preserving a strong labor market.
At our meeting that concluded last week, we took several steps in pursuit of these goals: We raised our policy interest rate for the first time since the start of the pandemic and said that we anticipate that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate to reach our objectives. We also said that we expect to begin reducing the size of our balance sheet at a coming meeting. In my press conference, I noted that action could come as soon as our next meeting in May, though that is not a decision that we have made. These actions, along with the adjustments we have made since last fall, represent a substantial firming in the stance of policy with the intention of restoring price stability. In my comments today, I will first discuss the economic conditions that warrant these actions and then address the path ahead for monetary policy.
The Labor Market Is Very Strong and Extremely Tight
To begin with employment, in the last few years of the historically long expansion that ended with the arrival of the pandemic, we saw the remarkable benefits of an extended period of strong labor market conditions. We seek to foster another long expansion in order to realize those benefits again.
The labor market has substantial momentum. Employment growth powered through the difficult Omicron wave, adding 1.75 million jobs over the past three months. The unemployment rate has fallen to 3.8 percent, near historical lows, and has reached this level much faster than anticipated by most forecasters (
figure 1
). While disparities in employment remain, job growth has been widespread across racial, ethnic, and demographic groups.
By many measures, the labor market is extremely tight, significantly tighter than the very strong job market just before the pandemic. There are far more job openings going unfilled today than before the pandemic, despite today's unemployment rate being higher. Indeed, there are a record 1.7 posted job openings for each person who is looking for work. Record numbers of people are quitting jobs each month, typically to take another job with higher pay. And nominal wages are rising at the fastest pace in decades, with the gains strongest for those at the lower end of the wage distribution and among production and nonsupervisory workers (
figure 2
).
It is worth considering why the labor market is so tight, given that the unemployment rate is actually higher than it was before the pandemic. One explanation is that the natural rate of unemployment may be temporarily elevated, so wage pressure is greater for any given level of unemployment. The sheer volume of hiring may have taxed the capacity of the market to bring workers and jobs together. The Delta and Omicron variants complicated hiring, and the strong financial position of households may have allowed some to be more selective in their job search. Over time, we might expect these factors to fade, reducing pressure in the job market.
A second source of labor market tightness is that the labor force participation rate dropped sharply in the pandemic and has only partly recovered. As a result, the labor force remains below its pre-pandemic trend (
figure 3
). Total demand for labor, measured by total employment plus posted job openings, has substantially recovered and far exceeds the size of the workforce.
About half of the shortfall in labor force participation is attributable to retirements during the pandemic.
1
History suggests that most of those retirees are unlikely to reenter the workforce. But some nonparticipation is due to factors that may fade with time, such as caregiving needs and fear of contracting COVID-19. With prime-aged participation still well below its pre-pandemic level, there is room for further progress. A more complete rebound is, however, likely to take some time. Increases in labor force participation often substantially lag declines in unemployment.
Overall, the labor market is strong but showing a clear imbalance of supply and demand. Our monetary policy tools cannot help with labor supply in the near term, but in a long expansion, the factors holding back supply will likely ease. In the meantime, we aim to use our tools to moderate demand growth, thereby facilitating continued, sustainable increases in employment and wages.
The Inflation Outlook Has Deteriorated Significantly
Turning to price stability, the inflation outlook had deteriorated significantly this year even before Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
The rise in inflation has been much greater and more persistent than forecasters generally expected. For example, at the time of our June 2021 meeting, every Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participant and all but one of 35 submissions in the Survey of Professional Forecasters predicted that 2021 inflation would be below 4 percent. Inflation came in at 5.5 percent.
2
For a time, moderate inflation forecasts looked plausible—the one-month headline and core inflation rates declined steadily from April through September. But inflation moved up sharply in the fall, and, just since our December meeting, the median FOMC projection for year-end 2022 jumped from 2.6 percent to 4.3 percent.
Why have forecasts been so far off? In my view, an important part of the explanation is that forecasters widely underestimated the severity and persistence of supply-side frictions, which, when combined with strong demand, especially for durable goods, produced surprisingly high inflation.
The pandemic and the associated shutdown and reopening of the economy caused a serious upheaval in many parts of the economy, snarling supply chains, constraining labor supply, and creating a major boom in demand for goods and a bust in services demand. The combination of the surge in goods demand with supply chain bottlenecks led to sharply rising goods prices (
figure 4
). The most notable example here is motor vehicles. Prices soared across the vehicles sector as booming demand was met by a sharp
decline
in global production during the summer of 2021, owing to shortages of computer chips. Production remains below pre-pandemic levels, and an expected sharp decline in prices has been repeatedly postponed.
Many forecasters, including FOMC participants, had been expecting inflation to cool in the second half of last year, as the economy started going back to normal after vaccines became widely available.
3
Expectations were that the supply-side damage would begin to heal. Schools would reopen—freeing parents to return to work—and labor supply would begin bouncing back, kinks in supply chains would begin resolving, and consumption would start rotating back to services, all of which could reduce price pressures. While schools are open, none of the other expectations has been fully met. Part of the reason may be that, contrary to expectations, COVID has not gone away with the arrival of vaccines. In fact, we are now headed once again into more COVID-related supply disruptions from China. It continues to seem likely that hoped-for supply-side healing will come over time as the world ultimately settles into some new normal, but the timing and scope of that relief are highly uncertain. In the meantime, as we set policy, we will be looking to actual progress on these issues and not assuming significant near-term supply-side relief.
The Policy Response
As the magnitude and persistence of the increase in inflation became increasingly clear over the second half of last year, and as the job market recovery accelerated beyond expectations, the FOMC pivoted to progressively less accommodative monetary policy. In June, the median FOMC participant projected that the federal funds rate would remain at its effective lower bound through the end of 2022, and as the news came in, the projected policy paths shifted higher (
figure 5
). The median projection that accompanied last week's 25 basis point rate increase shows the federal funds rate at 1.9 percent by the end of this year and rising above its estimated longer-run normal value in 2023. The latest FOMC statement also indicates that the Committee expects to begin reducing the size of our balance sheet at a coming meeting. I believe that these policy actions and those to come will help bring inflation down near 2 percent over the next 3 years.
As always, our policy projections are not a Committee decision or fixed plan. Instead, they are a summary of what the FOMC participants see as the most likely case going forward. The events of the past four weeks remind us that, in tumultuous times, what seems like the most likely scenario may change quite quickly: Each Summary of Economic Projections reflects a point in time and can become outdated quickly at times like these, when events are developing rapidly.
Thus, my main message today is that, as the outlook evolves, we will adjust policy as needed in order to ensure a return to price stability with a strong job market. Let me now turn to three questions about the likely evolution of policy.
How will fallout from the invasion of Ukraine affect the economy and monetary policy?
Russia's invasion of Ukraine may have significant effects on the world economy and the U.S. economy. The magnitude and persistence of these effects remain highly uncertain and depend on events yet to come.
Russia is one of the world's largest producers of commodities, and Ukraine is a key producer of several commodities as well, including wheat and neon, which is used in the production of computer chips. There is no recent experience with significant market disruption across such a broad range of commodities. In addition to the direct effects from higher global oil and commodity prices, the invasion and related events are likely to restrain economic activity abroad and further disrupt supply chains, which would create spillovers to the U.S. economy.
We might look to the historical experience with oil price shocks in the 1970s—not a happy story. Fortunately, the United States is now much better situated to weather oil price shocks.
4
We are now the world's largest producer of oil, and our economy is significantly less oil intensive than in the 1970s. Today a rise in oil prices has mixed effects on the economy, lowering real household incomes and thus demand, but raising investment in drilling over time and benefiting oil-producing areas more generally. On net, oil shocks tend to weigh on output in the U.S. economy, but by far less than in the 1970s.
Second, how likely is it that monetary policy can lower inflation without causing a recession?
Our goal is to restore price stability while fostering another long expansion and sustaining a strong labor market.
In the FOMC participant projections I just described, the economy achieves a soft landing, with inflation coming down and unemployment holding steady. Growth slows as the very fast growth from the early stages of reopening fades, the effects of fiscal support wane, and monetary policy accommodation is removed.
Some have argued that history stacks the odds against achieving a soft landing, and point to the 1994 episode as the only successful soft landing in the postwar period. I believe that the historical record provides some grounds for optimism: Soft, or at least soft-ish, landings have been relatively common in U.S. monetary history.
5
In three episodes—in 1965, 1984, and 1994—the Fed raised the federal funds rate significantly in response to perceived overheating without precipitating a recession (
figure 6
).
6
In other cases, recessions chronologically followed the conclusion of a tightening cycle, but the recessions were not apparently due to excessive tightening of monetary policy. For example, the tightening from 2015 to 2019 was followed by the pandemic-induced recession.
7
I hasten to add that no one expects that bringing about a soft landing will be straightforward in the current context—very little is straightforward in the current context. And monetary policy is often said to be a blunt instrument, not capable of surgical precision. My colleagues and I will do our very best to succeed in this challenging task. It is worth noting that today the economy is very strong and is well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy.
Finally, what will it take to restore price stability?
The ultimate responsibility for price stability rests with the Federal Reserve. Price stability is essential if we are going to have another sustained period of strong labor market conditions. I believe that the policy approach that I have laid out is well suited to achieving this outcome. We will take the necessary steps to ensure a return to price stability. In particular, if we conclude that it is appropriate to move more aggressively by raising the federal funds rate by more than 25 basis points at a meeting or meetings, we will do so. And if we determine that we need to tighten beyond common measures of neutral and into a more restrictive stance, we will do that as well.
Our monetary policy framework, as embodied in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, emphasizes that having longer-term inflation expectations anchored at our longer-run objective of 2 percent helps us achieve both our dual-mandate objectives. While we cannot measure longer-term expectations directly, we monitor a variety of survey- and market-based indicators. In the recent period, short-term inflation expectations have, of course, risen with inflation, but longer-run expectations remain well anchored in their historical ranges (
figure 7
).
The added near-term upward pressure from the invasion of Ukraine on inflation from energy, food, and other commodities comes at a time of already too high inflation. In normal times, when employment and inflation are close to our objectives, monetary policy would look through a brief burst of inflation associated with commodity price shocks. However, the risk is rising that an extended period of high inflation could push longer-term expectations uncomfortably higher, which underscores the need for the Committee to move expeditiously as I have described.
Conclusion
The past two years have been extraordinarily challenging for many Americans. Two years ago, more than 20 million people were losing their jobs, millions were falling ill, and lives were being disrupted. We have made enormous strides since then. Today, as I have discussed, the labor market is very strong. But, to end where I began, inflation is much too high. We have the necessary tools, and we will use them to restore price stability.
Note:
On April 7, 2022, the legend for Figure 3 was corrected to "CPS employment plus job openings."
1. See the discussion of labor force participation in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022),
Monetary Policy Report
(PDF)
(Washington: Board of Governors, February).
Return to text
2. This is headline personal consumption expenditures inflation on a Q4/Q4 basis. The Survey of Professional Forecasters statistic is a count by the authors using the second quarter 2021 survey. The data are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's website at
https://www.philadelphiafed.org/surveys-and-data/real-time-data-research/survey-of-professional-forecasters
.
Return to text
3. See the minutes of the June 2021 FOMC meeting, which are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
4. I discussed this topic more fully in Jerome H. Powell (2019), "
Data-Dependent Monetary Policy in an Evolving Economy
," speech delivered at "Trucks and Terabytes: Integrating the 'Old' and 'New' Economies," 61st Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Denver, Colo., October 8.
Return to text
5. See Alan Blinder (2022), "
Landings Hard and Soft: The Fed, 1965–2020 (PDF)
," slides from a presentation delivered at Markus' Academy, Bendheim Center for Finance, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J., February 11.
Return to text
6. I have identified these episodes by a single important year in the tightening cycle, but in each case, the period of tightening spanned more than one year.
Return to text
7. As I argued more fully in a previous speech, while the postwar recessions up through 1981 were arguably the result of stop-and-go policy, none of the recessions since then fit that mold so clearly; see Jerome H. Powell (2018),
"Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy
," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 24.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 55
==================================================
February 18, 2022
Preparing for the Financial System of the Future
Governor Lael Brainard
At the 2022 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York
Share
The financial system is undergoing fast-moving changes associated with digitalization and decentralization. Some of these innovations hold considerable promise to reduce transaction costs and frictions, increase competition, and improve financial inclusion, but there are also potential risks. With technology driving profound change, it is important we prepare for the financial system of the future and not limit our thinking to the financial system of today.
1
The Evolving Digitalization and Decentralization of Finance
In recent years, there has been explosive growth in the development and adoption of new digital assets that leverage distributed ledger technologies and cryptography. The market capitalization of cryptocurrencies grew from less than $100 billion five years ago to a high of almost $3 trillion in November 2021 and is currently around $2 trillion.
2
In parallel, we have seen rapid growth in the platforms that facilitate the crypto finance ecosystem, including decentralized finance (DeFi) platforms. These crypto platforms facilitate a variety of activities, including lending, trading, and custodying crypto-assets, in some cases outside the traditional regulatory guardrails for investor and consumer protection, market integrity, and transparency.
The growth in the crypto finance ecosystem is fueling demand for stablecoins—digital assets that are intended to maintain stable value relative to reference assets, such as the U.S. dollar. Stablecoin supply grew nearly sixfold in 2021, from roughly $29 billion in January 2021 to $165 billion in January 2022. There is a high degree of concentration among a few dollar-pegged stablecoins: As of January 2022, the largest stablecoin by market capitalization made up almost half of the market, and the four largest stablecoins together made up almost 90 percent.
3
Today, stablecoins are being used as collateral on DeFi and other crypto platforms, as well as in facilitating trading and monetization of cryptocurrency positions on and between crypto and other platforms.
In the future, some issuers envision that stablecoins will also have an expanded reach in the payment system and be commonly used for everyday transactions, both domestic and cross-border. So it is important to have strong frameworks for the quality and sufficiency of reserves and risk management and governance. As noted in a recent report on stablecoins by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, it is important to guard against run risk, whereby the prospect of an issuer not being able to promptly and adequately meet redemption requests for the stablecoin at par could result in a sudden surge in redemption demand.
4
It is also important to address settlement risk, whereby funds settlement is not certain and final when expected, and systemic risk, whereby the failure or distress of a stablecoin provider could adversely affect the broader financial system.
5
The prominence of crypto advertisements during the Super Bowl highlighted the growing engagement of retail investors in the crypto ecosystem.
6
In late 2021, Pew Research found that 16 percent of survey respondents reported having personally invested in, traded, or otherwise used a cryptocurrency—up from less than 1 percent of respondents in 2015.
7
There is also rising interest among institutional investors.
8
So it is perhaps not surprising that established financial intermediaries are undertaking efforts to expand the crypto services and products they offer. If the past year is any guide, the crypto financial system is likely to continue to grow and evolve in ways that increase interconnectedness with the traditional financial system.
As a result, officials in many countries are undertaking efforts to understand and adapt to the transformation of the financial system. Many jurisdictions are making efforts to ensure statutory and regulatory frameworks apply like rules to like risks, and some jurisdictions are issuing or contemplating issuing central bank currency in digital form.
9
Preparing for the Payment System of the Future
The Federal Reserve needs to be preparing for the payment landscape of the future even as we continue to make improvements to meet today's needs. In light of the rapid digitalization of the financial system, the Federal Reserve has been thinking critically about whether there is a role for a potential U.S. central bank digital currency (CBDC) in the digital payment landscape of the future and about its potential properties, costs, and benefits.
Our financial and payment system delivers important benefits today and is continuing to improve with developments like real-time payments. Nonetheless, certain challenges remain, such as a lack of access to digital banking and payment services for some Americans and expensive and slow cross-border payments. Growing interest in the digital financial ecosystem suggests that technology is enabling potential improvements that merit consideration.
10
In addition, it is important to consider how new forms of crypto-assets and digital money may affect the Federal Reserve's responsibilities to maintain financial stability, a safe and efficient payment system, household and business access to safe central bank money, and maximum employment and price stability. It is prudent to explore whether there is a role for a CBDC to preserve some of the safe and effective elements of the financial system of the present in a way that is complementary to the private sector innovations transforming the financial landscape of the future.
The public and private sector play important complementary roles within the financial system in the United States. From Fedwire to FedNow, the Federal Reserve has over a century of experience working to improve the infrastructure of the U.S. payment system to provide a resilient and adaptable foundation for dynamic private sector activity.
11
In parallel, private sector banks and nonbanks have competed to build the best possible products and services on top of that foundation and to meet the dollar-denominated needs of consumers and investors at home and around the world. The result is a resilient payment system that is responsive to the changing needs of businesses, consumers, and investors.
While the official sector provides a stable currency, operates some important payment rails, and undertakes regulation and oversight of financial intermediaries and critical financial market infrastructures, the private sector brings competitive forces encouraging efficiency and new product offerings and driving innovation. Responsible innovation has the potential to increase financial inclusion and efficiency and to lower costs within guardrails that protect consumers and investors and safeguard financial stability.
As we assess the range of future states of the financial system, it is prudent to consider how to preserve ready public access to government-issued, risk-free currency in the digital financial system—the digital equivalent of the Federal Reserve's issuance of physical currency. The Board recently issued a discussion paper that outlines the Federal Reserve's current thinking on the potential benefits, risks, and policy considerations of a U.S. CBDC.
12
The paper does not advance any specific policy outcome and does not signal that the Board will make any imminent decisions about the appropriateness of issuing a U.S. CBDC. It lays out four CBDC design principles that analysis to date suggests would best serve the needs of the United States if one were created. Those principles are that a potential CBDC should be privacy-protected, so consumer data and privacy are safeguarded; intermediated, such that financial intermediaries rather than the Federal Reserve interface directly with consumers; widely transferable, so the payment system is not fragmented; and identity-verified, so law enforcement can continue to combat money laundering and funding of terrorism.
Financial Stability
Given the Federal Reserve's mandate to promote financial stability, any consideration of a CBDC must include a robust evaluation of its impact on the stability of the financial system—not only as it exists today but also as it may evolve in the future. In consideration of the financial system today, it would be important to explore design features that would ensure complementarity with established financial intermediation. A CBDC—depending on its features—could be attractive as a store of value and means of payment to the extent it is seen as the safest form of money.
13
This could make it attractive to risk-averse users, perhaps leading to increased demand for the CBDC at the expense of other intermediaries during times of stress. So it is important to undertake research regarding the tools and design features that could be introduced to limit such risks, such as offering a non-interest bearing CBDC and limiting the amount of CBDC an end user could hold or transfer.
As I noted at the start, the digital asset and payment ecosystem is evolving at a rapid pace. Thus, it is also important to contemplate the potential role of a CBDC to promote financial stability in a future financial system in which a growing range of consumer payment and financial transactions would be conducted via digital currencies such as stablecoins. If current trends continue, the stablecoin market in the future could come to be dominated by just one or two issuers. Depending on the characteristics of these stablecoins, there could be large shifts in desired holdings between these stablecoins and deposits, leading to large-scale redemptions by risk-averse users at times of stress that could prove disruptive to financial stability. In such a future state, the coexistence of CBDC alongside stablecoins and commercial bank money could prove complementary, by providing a safe central bank liability in the digital financial ecosystem, much like cash currently coexists with commercial bank money. It is essential that policymakers, including the Federal Reserve, plan for the future of the payment system and consider the full range of possible options to bring forward the potential benefits of new technologies, while safeguarding stability.
International Considerations
Analysis of the potential future state of the financial system is not limited to the domestic implications. The dollar is important to global financial markets: It is not only the predominant global reserve currency, but the dollar is also the most widely used currency in international payments.
14
Decisions by other major jurisdictions to issue CBDCs could bring important changes to global financial markets that may prove more or less disruptive and that could influence the potential risks and benefits of a U.S. CBDC. Thus, it is wise to consider what the future states of global financial markets and transactions would look like both with and without a Federal Reserve-issued CBDC. For example, the People's Bank of China has been piloting the digital yuan, also known as e-CNY, in numerous Chinese cities over the past two years.
15
The substantial early progress on the digital yuan may have implications for the evolution of cross-border payments and payment systems. And it may influence the development of norms and standards for cross-border digital financial transactions.
It is prudent to consider how the potential absence or issuance of a U.S. CBDC could affect the use of the dollar in payments globally in future states where one or more major foreign currencies are issued in CBDC form. A U.S. CBDC may be one potential way to ensure that people around the world who use the dollar can continue to rely on the strength and safety of U.S. currency to transact and conduct business in the digital financial system. More broadly, it is important to consider how the United States can continue to play a lead role in the development of standards governing international digital financial transactions involving CBDCs consistent with norms such as privacy and security. Given the dollar's important role as a payment instrument across the world, it is essential that the United States be on the frontier of research and policy development regarding CBDC, as international developments related to CBDC can have implications for the global financial system.
Technology Research and Experimentation
Given the range of possible future states with significant digitization of the financial system, it is important that the Federal Reserve is actively engaging with the underlying technologies. Our work to build 24x7x365 instant payments rails leverages lessons from some of today's most resilient, high-performing, and large-scale technology platforms across the globe. It is providing important insights on the clearing and settlement models associated with real time payments as well as on fraud, cyber resilience, cloud computing, and related technologies.
In parallel with the Board's public consultation on CBDC, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, in collaboration with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has developed a theoretical high-performance transaction processor for CBDC.
16
They recently published the resulting software under an open-source license as a way of engaging with the broader technical community and promoting transparency and verifiability.
17
Moreover, the Board is studying how innovations, such as distributed ledger technology, could improve the financial system. This work includes experimentation with stablecoin interoperability and testing of retail payments across multiple distributed payment ledger systems. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York recently established an Innovation Center, focused on validating, designing, building, and launching new financial technology products and services for the central bank community.
18
These technology research and development initiatives are vital to our responsibilities to promote a safe and efficient payment system and financial stability, whatever the future may bring.
Conclusion
The financial system is not standing still, and neither can we. The digital financial ecosystem is evolving rapidly and becoming increasingly connected with the traditional financial system. It is prudent for the Board to understand the evolving payment landscape, the technological advancements and consumer demands driving this evolution, and the consequent policy choices as it seeks to fulfill its congressionally-mandated role to promote a safe, efficient, and inclusive system for U.S. dollar transactions.
19
To prepare for the financial system of the future, the Federal Reserve is engaging in research and experimentation with these new technologies and consulting closely with public and private sector partners.
1. I am grateful to Alexandra Fernandez, Lacy Douglas, David Mills, Sonja Danburg, and David Pope of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. CoinMarketCap, "Total Cryptocurrency Market Cap," last modified on February 16, 2022, https://coinmarketcap.com/charts/.
Return to text
3. "Total Stablecoin Supply," The Block, last modified on February 14, 2022, https://www.theblockcrypto.com/data/decentralized-finance/stablecoins/total-stablecoin-supply-daily.
Return to text
4. President's Working Group on Financial Markets, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,
Report on Stablecoins
(PDF)
(Washington: President's Working Group on Financial Markets, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, November 2021).
Return to text
5. See "
Virtual Hearing - Digital Assets and the Future of Finance: The President's Working Group on Financial Markets' Report on Stablecoins
," February 8, 2022.
Return to text
6. Khristopher Brooks and Aimee Picchi, "Super Bowl ads 2022: Crypto companies are spending millions to win over viewers,"
CBS News,
February 11, 2022, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/super-bowl-2022-commercials-cryptocurrency/.
Return to text
7. The 2015 survey focused on Bitcoin use. See "
16% of Americans say they have ever invested in, traded or used cryptocurrency
," Pew Research Center, last modified on November 11, 2021.
Return to text
8. Fidelity Digital Assets, "71% of Institutional Investors Plan to Buy or Invest in Digital Assets in the Fugure," July 20, 2021, https://www.fidelitydigitalassets.com/bin-public/060_www_fidelity_com/documents/FDAS/digital-asset-survey-2021.pdf.
Return to text
9. See Financial Stability Board,
Regulation, Supervision and Oversight of "Global Stablecoin" Arrangements: Final Report and High-Level Recommendations
(PDF)
(Basel: Financial Stability Board, October 2020), and International Monetary Fund,
Behind the Scenes of Central Bank Digital Currency
(Washington: International Monetary Fund, February 2022).
Return to text
10. Lael Brainard "
The Future of Retail Payments in the United States
"
(speech at the FedNow Service Webinar, Washington, D.C., August 6, 2020).
Return to text
11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "
Major Events in the History of the Federal Reserve's Role in the U.S. Payment System (PDF)
," in
The Fed Explained: What the Central Bank Does
, 11th ed. (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 2021).
Return to text
12. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "
Money and Payments: The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation (PDF)
," research paper (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 2022).
Return to text
13. Bank for International Settlements,
Central bank digital currencies: financial stability implications
(PDF)
(Basel: Bank for International Settlements, September 2021).
Return to text
14. Carol Bertaut, Bastian von Beschwitz, Stephanie Curcuru, "
The International Role of the U.S. Dollar
," October 6, 2021.
Return to text
15. Coco Feng, "China's digital currency: e-CNY wallet nearly doubles user base in two months to 261 million ahead of Winter Olympics,"
South China Morning Post
, January 19, 2022, https://www.scmp.com/tech/tech-trends/article/3163953/chinas-digital-currency-e-cny-wallet-nearly-doubles-user-base-two. See also Working Group on E-CNY Research and Development of the People's Bank of China, "
Progress of Research & Development of E-CNY in China (PDF)
," white paper (Beijing: People's Bank of China, July 2021).
Return to text
16. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, "
Project Hamilton Phase 1 A High Performance Payment Processing System Designed for Central Bank Digital Currencies
," news release, February 3, 2022.
Return to text
17. "A transaction processor for a hypothetical, general-purpose, central bank digital currency," GitHub, https://github.com/mit-dci/opencbdc-tx.
Return to text
18. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, "
New York Fed Launches the New York Innovation Center to Support Financial Technology Innovation in Central Banking
," press release, November 29, 2021.
Return to text
19. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Fostering Payment and Settlement System Safety and Efficiency"
in The Fed Explained
, 11th ed.
Return to text


Discurso 56
==================================================
November 30, 2021
Federal Reserve Independence: Foundations and Responsibilities
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio (via livestream)
Share
Watch Live
The COVID-19 pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. and global economies since the Great Depression.
1
Gross domestic product (GDP) collapsed at a nearly 33 percent annual rate in the second quarter of 2020. More than 22 million jobs were lost in just the first two months of the crisis, and the unemployment rate rose from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent in February to a postwar peak of almost 15 percent in April 2020. A precipitous decline in aggregate demand pummeled the consumer price level. The resulting disruptions to economic activity significantly tightened financial conditions and impaired the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses.
The fiscal and monetary policy response in the United States to the COVID crisis was unprecedented in its scale, scope, and speed. Legislation passed by the Congress in March 2020, December 2020, and March 2021 provided a total of nearly $5.8 trillion in fiscal support to the U.S. economy—about 28 percent of U.S. GDP.
2
The Federal Reserve acted decisively and with dispatch to deploy each and every tool in its conventional kit and to design, develop, and launch within weeks a series of innovative facilities to support the flow of credit to households and business. The facilities the Federal Reserve either relaunched or designed and developed anew in response to the COVID crisis were established under the authority of section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act; under section 13(3), these facilities can be established only in "unusual and exigent circumstances" and with approval of the Treasury Secretary.
3
The Global Pandemic Collapse (GPC) in the spring of 2020 was the second occasion in the past dozen years in which the Federal Reserve invoked its emergency lending powers to help forestall severe financial market disruptions—the first occasion being the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008–09. In my remarks today, I would like to reflect on the Federal Reserve's response to the GPC in the context of our institution's history and structure and to highlight not only the privileges that flow from, but also the responsibilities that are required to respect, our institutional independence.
Origins of the Federal Reserve
Let's begin with some history. At the urging of Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, the First Congress of the United States established the First Bank of the United States in 1791. Like similar institutions in other countries—most notably, the Bank of England—the First Bank of the United States was owned by the private sector, was publicly chartered, and carried out some of the operations that would be thought of today as those of a central bank.
4
That First Bank played a key role in executing Hamilton's vision to put the young federal government's finances on a sound footing, to promote the stabilization of the purchasing power of the U.S. dollar, and to support economic growth. Nevertheless, that First Bank became embroiled in politics, and the Congress failed to renew its 20-year charter in 1811. In 1816, the Congress did charter a Second Bank of the United States, which was designed along similar lines to its predecessor. But it, too, generated political controversy—Andrew Jackson was not a fan and was not shy in saying so—and its 20-year charter expired without renewal in 1836.
For the next 77 years, the United States operated without a central bank. There was significant financial-sector development during this time, with commercial banks, equity markets, and corporate bond markets all playing a growing role in financial intermediation in the U.S. economy. This period also witnessed several major financial panics that substantially disrupted economic activity.
5
One of those panics—the Panic of 1907—galvanized the Congress to establish a new central bank. The Federal Reserve was charted by the Congress in 1913 and directed specifically to promote the stability of the financial system. An important goal of the Federal Reserve in those early years was to smooth the large seasonal swings in interest rates and credit conditions associated with the harvest season that, in the past, had contributed to financial panics. The principal tool provided in the Federal Reserve Act to accomplish this goal was the ability of the Federal Reserve to lend funds to commercial banks against sound collateral through its "discount window."
6
Through the compromises and choices made in designing the Federal Reserve system, the Congress created an institution that received broader and more durable political support than had been the case for the First and Second Banks of the United States. At the center of the Federal Reserve System was the Federal Reserve Board, which was composed of public officials nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. In this initial incarnation, the Board included the Secretary of the Treasury as an
ex officio
member. The Federal Reserve System also included 12 Reserve Banks—distributed across a dozen geographic Districts—which were designed to be responsive to and report on regional economic conditions.
Although the Congress assigned the Federal Reserve a statutory set of goals and tools, policymakers from the very first days had substantial independence in how they used those tools to pursue the assigned goals. For example, the interest rate charged on discount window loans—rates that had an important bearing on overall financial conditions in the country—was set by Federal Reserve policymakers, with little interference from the Congress or the executive branch. The same was true of Federal Reserve purchases or sales of Treasury securities. These open market transactions were found, over time, to be another effective tool with which to influence overall financial conditions.
The Great Depression and Changes to the Structure of the Federal Reserve
In response to the Great Depression and reflecting a growing recognition that the Federal Reserve's original institutional design was in need of improvement, the Congress restructured the Federal Reserve System in the 1930s.
7
Greater authority over policy decisions was placed with the Board—whose members, given their presidential nomination and Senate confirmation, were thought to be more clearly accountable to the nation as a whole. At the same time, the Congress gave the Board increased independence from the executive branch by removing the Secretary of the Treasury's status as an
ex officio
member. Decisions regarding open market purchases of U.S. government securities, which were becoming the most important monetary policy tool of the Federal Reserve, were assigned to the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), which consists of the members of the Board of Governors and a rotating subset of the Reserve Bank presidents. In the FOMC structure set up in the mid-1930s and remaining in force today, only five Reserve Bank presidents are voting members of the FOMC at any one time, leaving the seven Board Governors typically in a majority position. This arrangement has served the Federal Reserve well during the past 85 years, as it promotes a diversity of views and a healthy debate regarding the policy options available. It is also worth noting a distinction that bears on decisionmaking powers regarding monetary policy and lending policy. In contrast to monetary policy, the power to make decisions about the structure of Federal Reserve lending programs, including the authority to launch emergency programs, resides solely with the Board.
8
Subsequent decades saw further changes to the governance of monetary policy. A notable development occurred in 1951, when the Federal Reserve obtained its current level of independence from the Treasury Department on monetary policy, as codified in the Treasury–Federal Reserve Accord. Another milestone occurred with the Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977, which assigned the Federal Reserve its current statutory mandate to achieve price stability and maximum employment.
9
Monetary policy had, in effect, pursued these goals since the accord, and the Federal Reserve's maximum-employment and price-stability goals had been embedded in previous acts of the Congress. But the statutory formalization of this "dual mandate" was important in specifying congressional intent and defining the Fed's goals.
In the decades after the Great Depression, while systemic financial disruptions in the United States were not unknown—the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s and the savings and loan crisis of the 1990s were certainly major events—systemic liquidity crises were relatively uncommon. And the Federal Reserve was able to address the disturbances that did occur using its traditional tools of providing discount window loans to banks, a tool that had been in its toolkit since 1913.
The Global Financial Crisis
This half-century of relative financial stability in the United States was shattered in 2008 by the GFC, a crisis that disrupted financial markets and impaired financial intermediation around the world. In the United States, many of the most severe disruptions occurred in wholesale funding markets and involved nonbank financial firms—such as broker-dealers, money market funds, nonbank mortgage lenders, and nonbank finance companies. These nonbank financial institutions, which had become a major source of financial intermediation in the United States in the decades leading up to the GFC, were typically lightly regulated, highly leveraged, and overly reliant on unstable sources of short-term funding. And because they were not banks, the Federal Reserve would have faced enormous challenges stemming the crisis solely by use of traditional discount window lending to depository institutions.
Funding markets during the GFC faced enormous stress. A number of major financial firms failed, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were forced into conservatorship, and the flow of credit to businesses and households was severely impaired. The Federal Reserve responded by using not only its traditional authority to lend to banks, but also, for the first time, its authority to lend to nonbank institutions under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act in unusual and exigent circumstances. The GFC emergency lending facilities that were stood up under this authority were designed to support short-term funding markets and to provide loans to nonbank financial firms, which in turn could then continue to intermediate credit to the private sector.
10
The Federal Reserve also made section 13(3) loans to individual distressed nonbank firms, like Bear Stearns and the American International Group, Inc., or AIG.
The Federal Reserve's emergency lending programs established during the GFC stabilized the financial system and helped prevent another great Depression. Consistent with the central bank's statutory authority, the facilities were designed to minimize the Federal Reserve's exposure to credit risk, and all of the facilities were wound down over time without any loss to taxpayers.
In the wake of the GFC, the Congress made several changes to the Federal Reserve's emergency lending authority. First, the Federal Reserve would be required to provide loans to nonbanks only through broad-based facilities: Bilateral loans to individual nonbank firms were no longer permissible. Second, all emergency lending programs would now require approval by the Secretary of the Treasury. Third, the Federal Reserve going forward would be required to provide enhanced and timely transparency with regard to any emergency lending facilities set up under section 13(3). In addition to these changes to the Federal Reserve's authority, the GFC also spurred wide-ranging financial regulatory reforms—in particular, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act—meant to improve the stability of the financial system.
The Federal Reserve's experience in the GFC reinforced a set of important principles guiding how it would respond to a future systemic financial crisis:
Act rapidly and decisively.
Act on a large scale with a variety of tools.
Be mindful that announcement effects can be vital for promoting confidence.
Design and price facilities as backstops to smooth a return to private-sector financial intermediation as quickly as possible.
Response to the Global Pandemic Collapse
The lessons learned from the Federal Reserve's response to the GFC were invaluable, as it had to assess, develop, and execute its response to the GPC in a matter of weeks.
11
In the first two weeks of March 2020, the FOMC lowered its target range for the federal funds rate by 1 1/2 percentage points, thereby bringing the range to its effective lower bound of 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee also provided forward guidance on the federal funds rate, stating that it expected to maintain the existing target range until it was confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve its maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
12
In addition, the Federal Reserve engaged in substantial purchases of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to support market functioning and further ease financial conditions.
Reflecting the heightened uncertainty of mid-March 2020, there was a surge in demand for liquidity across the global financial system. Spreads in some short-term credit markets, such as that for commercial paper, surged to levels nearing those of the 2008 financial crisis; investors ran on prime and tax-exempt money funds; and some firms found it difficult to obtain the credit needed to finance critical operations. Many businesses sought to draw down on lines of credit with banks to augment the amount of liquidity they had readily available. To relieve these strains, the Federal Reserve encouraged depository institutions to turn to the discount window, lowered the rate on discount window borrowing, and made it easier for institutions to borrow from the Federal Reserve at longer maturities. As conditions in U.S. credit markets were severely stressed, the Board determined once again that circumstances were unusual and exigent and acted rapidly and decisively to prevent financial collapse. With approval of the Treasury—and, in some cases, drawing on equity capital invested by the Treasury—the Board announced and stood up several section 13(3) short-term liquidity facilities similar to those established during the GFC.
13
And because dollar funding pressures were not limited to the United States, the Federal Reserve stabilized global dollar funding markets by expanding its swap line arrangements with foreign central banks and by lending dollars against U.S. Treasury securities to foreign central banks.
Against the background of concerns about major economic disruptions stemming from the pandemic, strains also emerged in the corporate bond market, the municipal debt market, and asset-backed securities markets. Issuance of new debt in these markets slowed sharply, and the cost of corporate credit increased considerably. Financing challenges were also faced by state and local governments as well as by small and medium-sized businesses traditionally reliant on bank lending.
In response to the crisis, the Congress passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, in late March 2020. The legislation authorized the Treasury to make sizable equity investments in Federal Reserve section 13(3) facilities. On the basis of this legislation, the Federal Reserve established several novel section 13(3) lending facilities to promote intermediation in credit markets. Among other measures, the Federal Reserve purchased corporate bonds in the secondary market under the corporate credit facilities, made loans to smaller nonfinancial companies through the Main Street Lending Program, and made loans to state and local governments through the Municipal Liquidity Facility.
These section 13(3) facilities promoted the flow of credit to households and businesses and helped stabilize financial and economic conditions. It is notable that they accomplished their goals even though credit provided by the facilities was priced in a manner consistent with their status as backstops rather than as full-fledged replacements for private-sector intermediation. Indeed, some facilities recorded little or no use. But their very existence as backstops appears to have contributed in substantial ways to calming markets and promoted the revival of activity in private credit markets as conditions normalized.
The public health policy response to contain the COVID-19 virus triggered an unprecedented disruption to the U.S. economy. The economic policy response to the crisis was equally unprecedented. As I have described, because of the breadth and depth of the dislocations in the U.S. financial system caused by the GPC, the Federal Reserve's credit facilities had to be designed to reach counterparties well beyond those associated with its traditional lending facilities. The Federal Reserve's actions during the GPC were taken to fulfill its long-standing statutory mandate to stem financial panics. The facilities established in 2020, in conjunction with the Federal Reserve's other actions and a robust fiscal policy response, provided crucial support to the U.S. economy as GDP was collapsing and unemployment was surging. Then, as the distress in financial markets abated and the economy regained its footing, the facilities were wound down and the emergency tools were, appropriately, put back in the toolbox with no adverse impact on credit conditions. For example, the Federal Reserve completed its sales of assets from the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility on August 31. Similarly, we are managing the paydown of assets in our other CARES Act facilities as they wind down over time (see the
Table
).
Concluding Remarks
In conclusion, in central banking, as in other endeavors, with privilege comes responsibility. The Federal Reserve recognizes and has acted according to the principle that its section 13(3) authorities are to be deployed only in unusual and exigent circumstances, and, in both the GFC and GPC, it took its responsibilities seriously and did so in a timely way. Outside of such circumstances, the Federal Reserve has been granted instrument independence by the Congress to set short-term interest rates and to purchase and sell U.S. government securities to achieve its statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability. Thank you for your time and attention, and I look forward to my conversation with President Mester.
References
Acharya, Viral V., Michael J. Fleming, Warren B. Hrung, and Asani Sarkar (2017). "Dealer Financial Conditions and Lender-of-Last-Resort Facilities,"
Journal of Financial Economics,
vol. 123 (January), pp. 81-107.
Carlson, Mark, and Marco Macchiavelli (2020). "Emergency Loans and Collateral Upgrades: How Broker-Dealers Used Federal Reserve Credit during the 2008 Financial Crisis,"
Journal of Financial Economics,
vol. 137 (September), pp. 701-22.
Clarida, Richard H., Burcu Duygan-Bump, and Chiara Scotti (2021). "
The COVID-19 Crisis and the Federal Reserve's Policy Response
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2021-035. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June.
Covitz, Daniel, Nellie Liang, and Gustavo A. Suarez (2013). "The Evolution of a Financial Crisis: Collapse of the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market,"
Journal of Finance,
vol. 68 (June), pp. 815-48.
Cowen, David Jack (2000).
The Origins and Economic Impact of the First Bank of the United States, 1791
-1797.
New York: Garland Publishing.
Duygan-Bump, Burcu, Patrick Parkinson, Eric Rosengren, Gustavo A. Suarez, and Paul Willen (2013). "How Effective Were the Federal Reserve Emergency Liquidity Facilities? Evidence from the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility,"
Journal of Finance,
vol. 68 (April), pp. 715-37.
Goodhart, Charles A.E. (1988).
The Evolution of Central Banks.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hamlin, Charles S. (1914). "
The Federal Reserve System as Established and in Operation (PDF)
," address delivered before the New York Chamber of Commerce, December 3.
Jalil, Andrew J. (2015). "A New History of Banking Panics in the United States, 1825-1929: Construction and Implications,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
vol. 7 (July), pp. 295-330.
James, John A., James McAndrews, and David F. Weiman (2013). "Wall Street and Main Street: The Macroeconomic Consequences of New York Bank Suspensions, 1866-1914,"
Cliometrica,
vol. 7 (May), pp. 99-130.
Judd, John, and Glenn D. Rudebusch (1999). "
The Goals of U.S. Monetary Policy
," FRBSF Economic Letter 1999-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, January.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, and Philipp Schnabl (2010). "When Safe Proved Risky: Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007–2009,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 24 (Winter), pp. 29-50.
Krooss, Herman E. (1960). "The Historical Background of the American Banking System," in Herbert V. Prochnow, ed.,
The Federal Reserve System.
New York: Harper & Brothers, pp. 1-18.
Lindsey, David E. (2003).
A Modern History of FOMC Communication: 1975
-
2002
(PDF)
, unpublished report, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, June 24 (released publicly in May 2010)
.
U.S. Congress, Senate (1975).
First Meeting on the Conduct of Monetary Policy: Hearings before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs,
April 29–30 and May 1, 1975, 94th Cong. Washington: Government Printing Office.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Mark Carlson, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Edward Nelson, Chiara Scotti, and Mark Van Der Weide for assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. This total includes the roughly $3 trillion from the spring 2020 bills—the Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2020; the Families First Coronavirus Response Act; the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act; and the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act—inclusive of the roughly $0.45 trillion in capitalization for the Fed lending facilities in the CARES Act; $0.9 trillion in the stimulus divisions of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, passed in late December 2020; and $1.9 trillion in the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, passed in March 2021.
Return to text
3. Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 343(3)) is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section13.htm
(quoted text in paragraph A).
Return to text
4. Goodhart (1988) provides a comparison of the First Bank of the United States with those of other central banks in the same era. Krooss (1960, p. 4) and Cowen (2000) describe the role the bank played in the U.S. economy and financial system.
Return to text
5. For a chronology of major and nonmajor banking panics in this period, see Jalil (2015). James, McAndrews, and Weiman (2013) discuss how suspensions of the payment system resulting from banking panics disrupted economic activity.
Return to text
6. As discussed in Hamlin (1914), by providing a reliable liquidity backstop to the commercial banking system, the discount window was critical to ensuring confidence and the Federal Reserve was able to help prevent panic dynamics from being set in motion.
Return to text
7. The most substantial change to the structure of the Federal Reserve System occurred with the Banking Act of 1935. As part of this restructuring, the Federal Reserve Board was renamed the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Return to text
8. The Federal Reserve Board was given authority to establish lending programs for the nonbanking sector—including households and nonfinancial businesses—in unusual and exigent circumstances, such as a financial crisis.
Return to text
9. See, for example, Judd and Rudebusch (1999) and Lindsey (2003). The Federal Reserve also had responsibility to seek maximum employment through the Employment Act of 1946, which also directed policymakers toward seeking maximum purchasing power. The 1977 legislation was, however, the first permanent law specifically pertaining to the Federal Reserve that explicitly assigned it the dual mandate. Previously, in early 1975, the Congress had directed the Federal Reserve to pursue "the goals of maximum employment [and] stable prices" in House Concurrent Resolution 133 (March 24, 1975), which was in force over the 1975-77 Congress alone. See Senate (1975, p. 3). The legislated wording of the dual mandate in 1977 was closely based on the wording of this resolution.
Return to text
10. Emergency lending facilities targeting short-term U.S. credit markets included the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Term Securities Lending Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility. The disruptions that occurred in these markets and the role these facilities played in addressing those disruptions are described, among other places, in Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2010); Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2013); Duygan-Bump and others (2013); Acharya and others (2017); and Carlson and Macchiavelli (2020).
Return to text
11. A detailed description of the Federal Reserve's response to the COVID crisis can be found in Clarida, Duygan-Bump, and Scotti (2021).
Return to text
12. For more information, see the March 15, 2020, FOMC statement, which is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
13. In particular, these facilities were the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, and the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility.
Return to text
Table: Federal Reserve emergency lending facilities
Facility
Announcement date
Launch date
End date
Peak outstanding (billions of dollars)
Current amount of assets (billions of dollars)
Treasury capital provided as equity
Used in GFC
Commercial Paper Funding Facility
March 17, 2020
April 14, 2020
March 31, 2021
4.2
0
$10 billion, ESF funds
Y
Primary Dealer Credit Facility
March 17, 2020
March 20, 2020
March 31, 2021
37.3
0
N/A
Y
Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility
March 18, 2020
March 23, 2020
March 31, 2021
54.1
0
$10 billion, ESF funds
Y
Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility
March 23, 2020
June 29, 2020
December 31, 2020
0
0
$50 billion, CARES funds
Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility
March 23, 2020
May 12, 2020
December 31, 2020
14.3
0
$25 billion, CARES funds
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
March 23, 2020
June 17, 2020
December 31, 2020
4.1
1.4
$10 billion, ESF and CARES funds
Y
Main Street Lending Program
March 23, 2020
July 6, 2020
January 8, 2021
16.6
13.5
$75 billion, CARES funds
Municipal Liquidity Facility
April 9, 2020
May 26, 2020
December 31, 2020
6.4
4.4
$35 billion, CARES funds
Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility
April 9, 2020
April 16, 2020
July 30, 2021
91.3
46.5
N/A
Note: The data are current as of November 10, 2021. ESF funds are traditional funds that were already in the Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) at the onset of the pandemic, and CARES funds are funds appropriated to the ESF under section 4027 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. On March 23, 2020, the Federal Reserve said it expected to announce soon the establishment of a Main Street Lending Program. The actual announcement of the program came on April 9, 2020. GFC is Global Financial Crisis.
N/A Not applicable.
Source: Federal Reserve Board.


Discurso 57
==================================================
November 29, 2021
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Introducing the New York Innovation Center Event, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to welcome everyone, including colleagues from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and in particular from the BIS Innovation Hub, to the opening of the New York Innovation Center.
The pace of technological change and innovation over the last decade has led some to argue that we are on the brink of a fourth industrial revolution—a digital revolution. Certainly, rapid innovation, including through the application of advanced digital technologies, machine learning, artificial intelligence, and big data, is revolutionizing the financial sector. The Federal Reserve has a mandate to understand and, in some cases, manage these changes, but it also has a responsibility to be at the forefront of change to deliver to the American people—and the international community—a reliable, efficient, and inclusive monetary and financial system.
Furthering the efforts around the Federal Reserve System to harness the power of innovation, I am delighted to welcome the opening of the New York Innovation Center. Located at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in the heart of the most important financial center in the world, this Innovation Center will draw on the expertise at the bank, in the Federal Reserve System, and from the broader financial community, as well as experts around the world to analyze and bring technology to bear on improving the global financial system.
Increasing the synergies of the New York Innovation Center will be its strategic partnership with the BIS Innovation Hub, recently established to foster dialogue, collaboration and knowledge-sharing among central banks and other authorities and institutions. In particular, the partnership will support our analysis of digital currencies—including central bank digital currencies; help to improve our current payment system—with a particular focus on making cross-border payments faster and less expensive; and it will provide new tools to aid our supervision of the financial system.
Linking up with the BIS in this way will enhance our ability to collaborate with central banks around the world and will ensure that the best and most up-to-date information, research, and practices are flowing freely. Since its inception in January 2020, I have served as head of the BIS Innovation Hub Advisory Committee and am very pleased that the Federal Reserve will be able to partner with the Hub in this important way.
So I want to extend my thanks to President Williams, Agustin Carstens, and all those that worked on the establishment of this center. And I look forward to the advances of both these institutions in supporting innovation in service to the safety and soundness of the financial system.
Thank you.


Discurso 58
==================================================
November 19, 2021
Perspectives on Global Monetary Policy Coordination, Cooperation, and Correlation
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the "Macroeconomic Policy and Global Economic Recovery" 2021 Asia Economic Policy Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Center for Pacific Basin Studies, San Francisco, California (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
In my remarks today, I would like to offer some perspectives on global monetary policy correlation and what it can—and cannot—reveal about the prevalence and value of global monetary policy coordination or, in the limit, binding global monetary cooperation
.
1
In both the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and the Global Pandemic Collapse (GPC), major central banks around the world responded by cutting policy rates to, and then keeping them at, their effective lower bounds (ELBs); by increasing their balance sheets through ambitious and expansive large-scale asset purchase and lending programs; and by offering forward guidance—both Delphic and Odyssean—on the stance of their future monetary policies.
2
As these examples make clear, we certainly do observe that national monetary policies are often correlated, and such examples are not confined to recent experience. Indeed, the international monetary economics literature abounds with historical and empirical studies of correlated global monetary policy cycles, not to mention the evident secular downtrend in global monetary policy rates observed in recent decades. Moreover, global monetary policies often also do appear at least sometimes to be coordinated. There are certainly enough meetings of Group of Seven (G-7), Group of Twenty, and Bank for International Settlements (BIS) central bank governors—virtual and in person—that provide such opportunities. By contrast with evidence of central bank correlation and coordination, the historical record suggests that, since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system 50 years ago, rarely, if ever, do major sovereign
central banks actually enter into, at least publicly—let alone respect—binding commitments to pursue formal cooperative policies.
3
Here and throughout the lecture, I shall reserve the meaning of the adjective
cooperative,
as in "cooperative" central bank policies, to define policies that can, at least conceptually, be thought of as policies pursued by sovereign central banks that fully incorporate any spillovers from one central bank's policies to the other central bank's mandates. Cooperative policies defined this way will, in general, differ from noncooperative policies—in the sense of the Nash equilibrium concept—designed to achieve domestic mandates assigned by sovereign institutions while taking other central bank policies as given. In these remarks, I will draw on perspectives informed not only by economic analysis—including my own academic research on the theory and empirics of central banks' policymaking—but also by my observations and experiences serving as Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve Board during what has certainly been an eventful three years.
To begin with the theory, it has long been appreciated that in the sorts of economic models used by central banks around the world, the calibrated gains to international monetary policy cooperation are found to be rather modest relative to a status quo ante in which each country runs a sensible policy, taking as given the sensible policies of the other countries. Today I will make a somewhat different, and less often discussed, case questioning formal global monetary policy cooperation—that, in practice, adopting it could plausibly erode central bank credibility and public support for central bank instrument independence.
International monetary policy coordination, which I think of as including the sharing of information and analysis among central banks regarding the evolution of their individual economies as well as the considerations that govern the setting of their policy instruments—in other words, information about their policy reaction functions can, and in my observation certainly does, enhance the design and effectiveness of monetary policy execution for each country. I shall give some examples later.
But while international monetary policy coordination may enhance the efficiency of monetary policy execution, I am skeptical that in practice there are additional material, reliable, and robust gains that would flow from a formal regime of binding monetary policy cooperation, at least among major G-7 economies with flexible exchange rates, open capital accounts, and central bank mandates that include price stability. Or, more precisely, it seems that whatever gains might exist in theory, they likely do not exceed the full cost of committing to such an arrangement in practice. In such a regime, national monetary policies in each country would be constrained to be set in such a way so as to jointly maximize some metric for global price stability and perhaps also other objectives. The reason is that there can be global externalities to monetary policy that create such theoretical gains to cooperation. However, as Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2002), among others, have shown in the context of central banks with domestic price-stability mandates, to achieve the theoretical gains to international monetary policy cooperation, policy in
each
country must be set with reference to an index of inflation in
all
countries party to the cooperative agreement.
This is a policy that no central bank would choose were it not bound to the agreement to achieve domestic price stability while taking other central banks' policies as given, which, of course, raises the question of how such an agreement might be enforced. In theory, if central banks were bound to set policy based solely on a policy rule that is a function of observed macroeconomic data, enforcement would be simple. But in practice, no sovereign central bank outsources its policy to an Excel spreadsheet, and, moreover, best-practice policy rules incorporate inputs—such as the neutral rate of interest or expected inflation—that are unobserved and time varying and thus difficult to monitor. Finally, central bank mandates vary across sovereign jurisdictions. For example, the Federal Reserve is mandated to pursue policies that achieve "maximum employment and price stability." The European Central Bank (ECB) is mandated by treaty to pursue price stability but also has a secondary mandate to contribute to achieving the objectives of the European Union, which include balanced economic growth and full employment. Similarly, the Bank of England's primary objective is to achieve the U.K. government's target of 2 percent inflation, but its secondary objective is to support the government's policy aims, including those for employment, growth, and—more recently—environmental sustainability. So even though all major central banks are mandated to achieve "price stability" in some form or fashion, their mandates typically include other obligations that vary across jurisdictions. Because these obligations can, and sometimes do, require central banks to make a tradeoff—for example, in the United States, between inflation and employment in the presence of supply shocks—defining the objective that a cooperative agreement would choose to maximize would be a formidable task.
I believe that, in practice, beyond the issue of enforcement and agreement on terms, there could well be another challenge with policy cooperation that is absent from most theoretical discussions. Simply stated and in the context of a price-stability mandate for each central bank, the problem—as I see it—is the threat to the credibility of the central bank, the challenges to central bank communication, and the resulting potential loss of support for its policy actions from the public when the policy choices that would be required by binding monetary policy cooperation react not only to home inflation deviations from target, but also to deviations of foreign inflation from target. In theoretical models, the commitment to the inflation target is just assumed to be perfect and credible, but in practice, credibility appears to be a function of central bank communication and of the policies actually implemented pushing inflation toward—and, in the absence of shocks, keeping inflation at—target. I suspect that, in practice, central banks would have a hard time maintaining credibility and independence as well as communicating a policy that raised home interest rates aggressively not because home inflation is too high but because foreign inflation is!
While, perhaps for these reasons, we do not have many confirmed sightings of genuine binding monetary policy cooperation, we do observe many examples of monetary policy correlation (see
figure 1
). Monetary policies will obviously be correlated if countries are subject to common shocks—such as in the GFC and the GPC—but can also be correlated as a consequence of integrated global capital markets. The Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2002) model provides a simple illustration of how this correlation can come about. In the "home" country, the optimal inflation-targeting monetary policy can be written as a Taylor-type rule:
$$ R_{t} = r_{t} + (1 + \frac{\lambda}{\alpha})\pi_{t}, $$
where $$r_t$$ is the "neutral" interest rate in the home country consistent with price stability and trend growth and $$\pi_t$$ is inflation in the home country. The ratio $$\lambda/\alpha$$ captures the extent to which the home central bank trades off its inflation and gross domestic product (GDP) objectives when they are in conflict. The parameter $$\alpha$$ indexes the priority the central bank places on stabilizing GDP growth relative to its trend path. When $$\alpha$$ is large, the central bank leans against high inflation less aggressively than it would were $$\alpha$$ small. With an integrated global capital market, the neutral policy rate at home is a function of trend GDP growth at home as well as expected foreign GDP growth:
$$ r_{t} = 2E_{t}\{\Delta \bar{y}_{t+1}\} + E_{t}\{\Delta y^{*}_{t+1}\}. $$
Now, to the extent the foreign central bank has a comparative advantage in tracking or forecasting foreign output growth—which, of course, it should, since such growth will depend on the foreign central bank's monetary policy—sharing this information with the home central bank can improve that institution's estimate of the home equilibrium real interest rate and thus the effectiveness of its policy rule in meeting its domestic objectives.
The foreign central bank sets its policy rate in an analogous fashion:
$$ R^{*}_{t} = r^{*}_{t} + (1 + \frac{\lambda}{\alpha^{*}})\pi^{*}_{t}. $$
The ratio $$\lambda/\alpha^{*}$$ captures the extent to which the foreign central bank trades off its inflation and GDP objectives when they are in conflict, and note that this tradeoff may be different than that of the home central bank. With an integrated global capital market, the neutral policy rate abroad is given by
$$ r^{*}_{t} = 2E_{t}\{\Delta \bar{y}^{*}_{t+1}\} + E_{t}\{\Delta y_{t+1}\}. $$
This simple example illustrates one channel through which globally integrated capital markets can introduce policy correlation even in the absence of policy coordination or cooperation. For example, even if home and foreign inflation rates and trend growth rates are uncorrelated across countries, sensible monetary policies can be correlated across countries if neutral policy rates are correlated, as they appear to be in the data (see
figure 2
, which is based on Holston, Laubach, and Williams, 2017).
A recent working paper, Ferreira and Shousha (2021), models the determinants of the neutral policy rate in the United States and includes in the empirical specification an index of global productivity growth and demographic trends. Their empirical estimates attribute 85 basis points of the decline in U.S. neutral real interest rates since 2000 to global spillovers from the slowdown in global trend growth and demographic trends. So policy correlation can be an outcome of noncooperative monetary policy operating in an integrated global capital market and not evidence, in and of itself, of policy coordination, let alone cooperation. Before continuing, I consider briefly how monetary policy would differ under binding cooperation in the simple example sketched out earlier. Under international monetary policy cooperation, the policy rate is set according to
$$ R_{t} = r_{t} + (1 + \frac{\lambda}{\alpha})\pi_{t} + \frac{1}{3}(1+\frac{\lambda}{\alpha})\pi^{*}_{t}. $$
So, intuitively, while policy in the home country does place more weight on home inflation when setting the interest rate, it also reacts to foreign inflation as well, as I discussed earlier.
Consider the case with home inflation high and foreign inflation low. As can be seen from the preceding equation, the optimal policy under cooperation calls for the home interest rate to be lower—more accommodative—than it would be in the absence of cooperation. In practice, the home central bank's credibility as an inflation targeter to satisfy its domestic price-stability mandate might well suffer if it failed to respond aggressively to high domestic inflation because of, say, serious deflation abroad.
Monetary Policy Spillovers Flow in Both Directions
There is a vast literature that documents the existence of international spillovers from U.S. monetary policy, especially to emerging markets (EMs). Recent research—Hoek, Kamin, and Yoldas (2020)—suggests that the extent and consequences of such spillovers depend importantly on the source of a shift in U.S. monetary policy. Their key finding, illustrated in
figure 3
, is that Federal Reserve policy rate surprises attributed to stronger U.S. growth generally have only moderate spillovers to EM financial conditions, whereas U.S. policy rate changes attributed to U.S. inflationary pressures trigger more substantial spillovers to EM financial conditions. The authors also find compelling evidence that the magnitude of the cross-border spillovers attributed to U.S. monetary policy shifts depends on a country's macroeconomic vulnerability—as measured by inflation, current account deficit, international reserves, government debt, external debt, and private-sector credit growth, with more vulnerable EM countries experiencing larger spillovers from U.S. monetary policy.
A recent paper—Curcuru, De Pooter, and Eckerd (2018)—examines and compares the consequences of ECB policy actions for U.S. financial conditions and the consequences of Federal Reserve policy actions for euro-area financial conditions. Their main findings are summarized in the two panels in
figure 4
. The left panel presents evidence of statistically significant spillovers from Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) policy announcements to euro-area bond markets. But, as shown in the right panel, the authors find that the spillovers from ECB policy announcements to U.S. yields are roughly as large as those from FOMC announcements to bund yields.
While I will certainly acknowledge that both fundamental and financial shocks originating in the United States, including shifts in the direction of U.S. monetary policy, can and do propagate globally (see, for example, Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, forthcoming), the evidence suggests that causality can and does run in both directions. It is not difficult to recall external events that have triggered spillovers from foreign sovereign markets to the U.S. economy that have had observable implications for U.S. monetary policy.
The Mexican peso crisis of 1994–95 and the Asian financial crisis of 1997–98 resulted in substantial declines in economic activity in emerging markets but had only a modest effect on the U.S. economy. One reason for this outcome was "safe haven" flows into the dollar assets that pushed down U.S. bond yields. But the Russian default of August 1998, followed by the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management, had more substantial effects on global markets and posed greater risk to the U.S. economy, and these events triggered a policy response by the Federal Reserve that cut the federal funds rate 75 basis points between September and November of that year. When in the next year the global financial system stabilized, the Federal Reserve reversed those actions and returned the federal funds rate to the level prevailing before those events.
In more recent times, global shocks have also been consequential for U.S. economic prospects and monetary policy. Examples include the 2011–13 euro-zone crisis and the China devaluation and capital flight episode of 2015–16, when worries about a hard landing and renminbi depreciation, respectively, roiled world markets. Both of these shocks originated in economies with large footprints in the global economy and financial system, and, as a result, they induced substantial disruptions in global financial markets. During both episodes, U.S. stock markets fell and the dollar appreciated, especially during 2015 and 2016. As ever, these adverse global shocks triggered safe-haven flows that pushed U.S. Treasury yields down. But despite the drop in Treasury yields, overall financial conditions in the United States tightened, weighing on aggregate demand.
U.S. monetary policy responded to these global "headwinds," helping stave off actual contractions of U.S. activity. During the 2011–13 euro-zone crisis, the Federal Reserve was already pursuing very accommodative policies in the wake of the GFC, but the introduction of the maturity extension program in September 2011 and the announcement in September 2012 of the third installment of quantitative easing were in part aimed at offsetting the effect of these global headwinds on U.S. aggregate demand. Regarding the aforementioned China devaluation episode of 2015–16, Federal Reserve statements and transcripts from that time indicate that concerns about these developments and their effect on the U.S. economy were a factor that contributed to the delay in implementing previously signaled policy rate increases.
4
Again, as in the 1997–98 episode discussed earlier, once the "storm had passed," the previously signaled policy normalization process commenced in 2017.
The Federal Reserve and ECB Framework Reviews
The monetary policy framework reviews conducted by the Federal Reserve and the ECB provide another example of monetary policy correlation. In February 2019, the Federal Reserve System launched a review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. A key motivation for the Fed's review as well as the ECB's review was the substantial decline in estimates of the neutral real interest rate, r*, that, over the longer run, is consistent with price stability. This decline has critical implications for monetary policy because it leaves central banks with less conventional policy space to offset adverse shocks to aggregate demand.
5
As discussed in Clarida (2020), the Fed's review, from the outset, built on three pillars: a series of
Fed Listens
events, a flagship research conference, and a series of rigorous briefings for the Committee commencing in July 2019 and running through January 2020.
6
While our plans to conclude the review earlier in 2020 were, like so many things, delayed by the arrival of the pandemic, in August 2020, the Federal Reserve did announce, with unanimous support, an evolution of its monetary policy strategy to flexible average inflation targeting.
7
Similar to the Federal Reserve, the ECB launched a review of its monetary policy strategy in January 2020.
8
Since the time of its previous strategy review in 2003, like the Fed, the ECB observed profound structural changes in the global and euro-area economies that have driven down neutral interest rates and increased the incidence and duration of episodes in which nominal policy interest rates are close to the ELB. So the ECB's review sought to adapt its monetary policy to the current economic environment and to ensure that its policy could remain effective at the ELB. In its review, the ECB heard from a wide variety of European organizations and citizens, including through a series of
ECB Listens
events.
9
The ECB's Governing Council engaged in a series of deliberations, also informed by extensive staff background analysis on a range of topics. In July 2021, with unanimous support from its Governing Council, the ECB announced its new strategy.
10
Key elements of that strategy are a symmetric 2 percent inflation target, a view that the ELB requires especially forceful or persistent monetary policy measures to keep inflation expectations from drifting lower, and the affirmation that the full range of measures it has used in recent years will remain in its toolkit.
The similarities in the two framework evolutions are due to the fact that powerful common global forces are driving down neutral policy rates and limiting the effectiveness of monetary policy in downturns to offset declines in aggregate demand. This asymmetry of policy effectiveness caused by the ELB imparts a secular downward bias to inflation that, if not offset, could de-anchor inflation expectations below the central bank's price-stability objectives. In addition, the similarities in the processes according to which these two framework reviews were conducted reflected also a convergence in thinking about best practices for such reviews that was facilitated by a working group on central bank frameworks set up by the BIS.
Conclusion
In this speech, I have offered some perspectives on global monetary policy correlation and what it can—and cannot—reveal about the prevalence and value of global monetary policy coordination or, in the limit, binding global monetary cooperation. I have argued that, while there are several recent and historical examples where we certainly do observe that national monetary policies are often correlated, adopting formal global monetary policy cooperation could plausibly erode central bank credibility and public support for central bank independence. But I also observe that international monetary policy coordination, defined as including the sharing of information and analysis among central banks regarding the evolution of their individual economies and information about their policy reaction functions, can enhance the design and effectiveness of monetary policy execution for each country.
Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward to my conversation with Sylvain.
References
Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012). "
Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Spring, pp. 1–54.
*
Clarida, Richard H. (2020). "
The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution
," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31.
——— (2021). "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework and Outcome-Based Forward Guidance
," speech delivered at "SOMC: The Federal Reserve's New Policy Framework," a forum sponsored by the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee, New York (via webcast), April 14.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2002). "A Simple Framework for International Monetary Policy Analysis,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 49 (July), pp. 879–904.
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Michiel De Pooter, and George Eckerd (2018). "
Measuring Monetary Policy Spillovers between U.S. and German Bond Yields
," International Finance Discussion Papers 1226. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
European Central Bank (2020). "
ECB Launches Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy
," press release, January 23.
——— (2021a). "Strategy Review," webpage,
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/search/review/html/index.en.html
.
——— (2021b). "
ECB's Governing Council Approves Its New Monetary Policy Strategy
," press release, July 8.
Ferreira, Thiago, and Samer Shousha (2021). "
Supply of Sovereign Safe Assets and Global Interest Rates
," International Finance Discussion Papers 1315. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
Hoek, Jasper, Steve Kamin, and Emre Yoldas (2020). "
When Is Bad News Good News? U.S. Monetary Policy, Macroeconomic News, and Financial Conditions in Emerging Markets (PDF)
," International Finance Discussion Papers 1269. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"
Journal of International Economics,
vol. 108 (May, S1), pp. S59–75.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélène Rey (forthcoming). "The Global Financial Cycle," in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,
Handbook of International Economics,
vol. 5. Oxford, United Kingdom: North‑Holland.
Powell, Jerome H. (2020). "
New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review
," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Burcu Duygan-Bump, Chiara Scotti, and Paul Wood for assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. The terms "Delphic" and "Odyssean" are used to describe different types of forward guidance. Delphic forward guidance forecasts macroeconomic performance and likely monetary policy actions under that forecast, whereas Odyssean forward guidance publicly commits the FOMC to a future action. For more details, see Campbell and others (2012).
Return to text
3. While adopting the euro—and, more broadly, joining a currency union—is the ultimate binding commitment to cooperative monetary policy, the focus of my remarks today is on countries that are not members of a currency union.
Return to text
4. The minutes and transcripts of these FOMC meetings are accessible on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
5. For a detailed discussion of the elements that motivated the launch of the review, see Clarida (2020, 2021) and Powell (2020).
Return to text
6. Summaries of these discussions can be found in the minutes of these FOMC meetings, which are accessible on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
7. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
.
Return to text
8. See European Central Bank (2020).
Return to text
9. See European Central Bank (2021a).
Return to text
10. See European Central Bank (2021b).
Return to text
* This reference was updated on November 22, 2021.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 59
==================================================
November 09, 2021
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Conference on Diversity and Inclusion in Economics, Finance, and Central Banking, sponsored by the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the European Central Bank (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good morning. It is a pleasure to welcome you to today's discussion and to host this third Conference on Diversity and Inclusion in Economics, Finance, and Central Banking. My colleagues and I are proud to cosponsor this conference along with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, and the European Central Bank.
We are truly honored by this impressive array of panelists, discussants, and speakers, which include eminent research economists as well as current and former policymakers from here and around the world. We are grateful for the time, energy, and insights you have committed to this work, and we look forward to the day when we can gather together again in person.
To kick off today's discussions, I would like to touch briefly on these subjects from two distinct perspectives. First, I will discuss some of the ways we at the Federal Reserve approach issues of persistent economic inequities. Then I will review some of how we as central banks are addressing the issues around diversity and inclusion in economics as institutions and employers.
Policymaking
Taking the first of these topics, we know, of course, that an economy is healthier and stronger when as many people as possible are able to work. If entrenched inequities prevent some Americans from participating fully in our labor markets, not only will they be held back from opportunities, but our economy overall will not realize its potential. And those who have historically been left behind stand the best chance of prospering in a strong economy with plentiful job opportunities.
Our recent history highlights both the benefits of a strong economy and the severe costs of a weak one. In the later years of the long expansion that ended with the pandemic, the benefits of employment continued to spread more widely and to reach those at the margins of the economy. Prior to the pandemic, unemployment was at 50‑year lows. Wages had been moving up, and meaningfully so, especially on the lower ends of the pay scale. Many who had struggled for years were finding jobs. Racial disparities in unemployment were narrowing.
In contrast, one of the great cruelties of the COVID-19 recession is the toll it took on workers who were finally beginning to experience the benefits of a period of historically long economic growth. Those same groups, unfortunately, disproportionately shouldered the brunt of the pandemic's burden.
Most entrenched inequities are beyond the power of monetary policy to address. The specific goals given to us by Congress, however, to foster achievement of our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, form the foundation of a strong and stable economy.
It was with this in mind that my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee, as part of last year's update to the Fed's monetary policy framework, defined maximum employment as a broad and inclusive goal. This innovation recognizes that a strong labor market delivers broad-reaching benefits and extends those benefits in particular to low- and moderate-income communities. While monetary policy does not target any particular group of people, when we assess whether we are at maximum employment, we purposely look at a wide range of indicators, and we are attentive to disparities in the labor market, rather than just the headline numbers.
Diversity and inclusion play a role in policymaking as well. As policymakers working on behalf of the entire public, we benefit greatly by seeking out and listening to the perspectives and experiences of people who represent the diverse landscape of the economy. We regularly meet with a broad range of groups as we assess the economy. And as we worked to update our monetary policy framework, we hosted a series of listening events across the country before and during the pandemic, and these conversations factored importantly into our thinking and our new framework.
Diversity in Economics
Next, I would like to turn to an issue facing many of us at this conference—namely, how central banks as institutions and employers grapple with and confront diversity and inclusion within economics. Collectively, we are among the largest employers in the field of economics, which both affects our own workplaces and affords us an opportunity to help influence and shape the evolution of the profession.
Throughout my career, in both the public and the private sectors, I have seen that the best and most successful organizations are often the ones that have a strong and persistent commitment to diversity and inclusion. These organizations consistently attract the best talent, by investing in and retaining a world-class workforce.
I know that the central banks represented here today are indeed working diligently to do just that. At the Fed, we are hosting events like this one, where high-quality economic research is brought to bear. We are working to foster an inclusive workplace environment where staff can feel comfortable at work and to promote a similarly inclusive culture within the profession. We are working to broaden our reach by recruiting at historically black colleges and universities and Hispanic-serving institutions, as well as by hosting events to promote career opportunities at the Fed.
My colleagues and I know that both the opportunities and the challenges are great and that the work is never truly done. Whether you are a researcher bringing your analytical skills to bear, or you are on the front lines of improving the diversity of the economics pipeline, or perhaps you are in an institution where you are redoubling your efforts to attract diverse talent, your endeavors are making a difference. As a group, we are fortunate to have opportunities like this to reaffirm the importance of diversity in our professions, in our research, and in our policymaking, and I am glad that we are here today to continue this work. Thank you.
Related Content
Conference on Diversity and Inclusion in Economics, Finance, and Central Banking


Discurso 60
==================================================
November 08, 2021
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Gender and the Economy Conference, a symposium hosted by the Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good morning. I am pleased to welcome everyone to today's conference on gender and the economy. Thank you for being here, for participating, and for lending your expertise on this important topic.
We have gathered an impressive lineup of speakers and panelists, who will address a range of timely and important issues.
To open the conference, I will give a brief tour of the important research on display here, then discuss how the pandemic has affected the economy along gender lines.
Research
The speakers and panelists will be exploring a wide range of topics, from a historical review of gender issues and the economy to how someone's education options—and the financing of those choices—affect that person's early career and financial stability. Speakers and panelists will also be looking at the influence of family and caregiving on career advancement and will discuss timely topics of wealth and retirement.
The Pandemic and Gender
The pandemic widened deep-rooted inequities in our economy. Along racial, gender, and socioeconomic lines, those least able to bear it, unfortunately, were those who were most affected. Women make up the majority of frontline workers, who have been under substantial strain—and subject to personal risks—during the pandemic. Additionally, women took on the majority of caring responsibilities, for older relatives and children alike. As schools closed and childcare services shuttered during the worst of the pandemic, that added responsibility and stress made working more difficult for some and took many away from their jobs. These burdens are real and have been an additional challenge during an already challenging time.
In a reversal of previous recessions, women suffered more from job losses in the COVID-19 recession than men. In April 2020, the unemployment rate for women was 16.1 percent, compared with 13.6 percent for men. The gap persisted until September of that year, and while it has since reversed, it does not account for the many women who left the workforce entirely.
1
Increased childcare responsibilities during the pandemic also affected many parents' working lives. Mothers of small children were more likely to exit the labor force during the pandemic compared with previous periods. These increases were larger among mothers who earned less before the pandemic.
2
This issue was widespread and had significant financial consequences on many households. The Federal Reserve's 2020 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking shows that the pandemic disrupted childcare or in-person schooling for nearly 70 percent of parents, with 25 percent of mothers reporting they did not work or worked less as a result. Many faced substantial financial difficulty. Only 37 percent of mothers who reported not working or working less because of childcare or schooling disruptions would cover a $400 expense with cash or its equivalent.
As households and the economy continue to recover, the lessons learned during this era will help inform how policymakers and communities work to bridge those gaps. Long-standing disparities weigh on the productive capacity of our economy, which can only realize its full potential if everyone has a solid chance to contribute to, and to reap the benefits of, broad-reaching prosperity.
Conclusion
In closing, I want to thank you all for taking the time to join this discussion. These are vital issues not just to the economy, but to families across the country. There is more to be done, but this conference highlights the number of world-class researchers, practitioners, and policymakers who are dedicated to understanding and addressing these deeply entrenched issues.
As a group, we have an opportunity to reaffirm the importance of gender parity and diversity in our professions, in our research, and in our policymaking. Thank you.
1. Statistics come from historical tables A-1 ("Employment Status of the Civilian Population by Sex and Age") of the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Employment Situation report. See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2021),
"The Employment Situation".
Return to text
2. See Katherine Lim and Mike Zabek (2021),
"Women's Labor Force Exits during COVID-19: Differences by Motherhood, Race, and Ethnicity,"
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2021-067 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).
Return to text
Related Content
Gender and the Economy Conference


Discurso 61
==================================================
November 08, 2021
Flexible Average Inflation Targeting and Prospects for U.S. Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the Symposium on Monetary Policy Frameworks, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Outlooks and Outcomes for the U.S. Economy
The U.S. economy in the second quarter of this year made the transition from economic recovery to economic expansion.
1
Given the catastrophic collapse in U.S. economic activity in the first half of 2020 as a result of the global pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it, few forecasters could have expected—or even dared to hope—in the spring of last year that the recovery in gross domestic product (GDP), from the sharpest decline in activity since the Great Depression, would be either so robust or as rapid. In retrospect, it seems clear that timely and targeted monetary and fiscal policy actions—unprecedented in both scale and scope—provided essential and significant support to the economic recovery as it got under way last year. Indeed, the National Bureau of Economic Research's Business Cycle Dating Committee determined in July that the recession that began in March of last year ended in April, making it not only the deepest recession on record, but also the briefest.
2
The recovery that commenced in the summer of 2020 was quite robust, and, with one quarter to go, GDP growth in 2021 is projected by the Fed and many outside forecasters to be the fastest since 1983. However, it must be noted that the course of the economy this year and beyond will depend on the course of this virus. That said, under the median projection for GDP growth in the September Summary of Economic projections, the level of real GDP will have returned to its pre pandemic trend growth trajectory by the fourth quarter of 2021, which if realized would represent one of the most rapid such recoveries in 50 years.
3
In the September SEP round, my individual projections for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the policy rate path turned out to be quite close to the path of SEP medians for each of these variables over the 2021–24 projection window. Under these projections, GDP growth steps down from 5.9 percent this year to 3.8 percent in 2022 and further to 2.5 percent and 2 percent in 2023 and 2024, respectively. Not surprisingly, the projected path of above-trend GDP growth in 2021 and 2022 translates into rapid declines in the projected path for the unemployment rate, which is projected to fall to 3.8 percent by the end of 2022 and 3.5 percent by the end of 2023. This modal projection for the path of the unemployment rate is, according to the Atlanta Fed jobs calculator, consistent with a rebound in labor force participation to its estimated demographic trend and is also consistent with cumulative employment gains this year and next that, by the end of 2022, eliminate the 4.2 million "employment gap" relative to the previous cycle peak.
4
My projections for headline and core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation are, alas, also similar to the median SEP numbers. Under the projected SEP path for inflation, core PCE inflation surges to at least 3.7 percent this year before reverting back to 2.3 percent in 2022, 2.2 percent in 2023, and 2.1 percent in 2024. Thus, the baseline outlook for inflation over the three-year projection window reflects the judgment, shared with many outside forecasters, that under appropriate monetary policy, most of the inflation overshoot relative to the longer-run goal of 2 percent will, in the end, prove to be transitory. But as I have noted before, there is no doubt that it is taking much longer to fully reopen a $20 trillion economy than it did to shut it down. Although in a number of sectors of the economy the imbalances between demand and supply—including labor supply—are substantial, I do continue to judge that these imbalances are likely to dissipate over time as the labor market and global supply chains eventually adjust and, importantly, do so without putting persistent upward pressure on price inflation and wage gains adjusted for productivity. But let me be clear on two points. First, realized PCE inflation so far this year represents, to me, much more than a "moderate" overshoot of our 2 percent longer-run inflation objective, and I would not consider a repeat performance next year a policy success. Second, as always, there are risks to any outlook, and I and 12 of my colleagues believe that the risks to the outlook for inflation are to the upside.
Prospects for U.S. Monetary Policy
In September 2020, the FOMC introduced—and since then has reaffirmed—outcome-based, threshold guidance that specifies three conditions that the Committee expects will be met before it considers increasing the target range for the federal funds rate, currently 0 to 25 basis points.
5
This guidance in September of last year brought the forward guidance on the federal funds rate in the statement into alignment with the new flexible average inflation targeting framework adopted in August 2020.
6
To quote from the statement, these conditions are that "labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time."
While we are clearly a ways away from considering raising interest rates, if the outlooks for inflation and unemployment I summarized a moment ago turn out to be the actual outcomes realized over the forecast horizon, then I believe that these three necessary conditions for raising the target range for the federal funds rate will have been met by year-end 2022.
7
Core PCE inflation since February 2020—a calculation window that smooths out any base effects resulting from "round trip" declines and rebounds in the price levels of COVID-19-sensitive sectors and, coincidentally, also measures the average rate of core PCE inflation since hitting the effective lower bound (ELB) in March 2020—is running at 2.8 percent through September 2021 and is projected to remain moderately above 2 percent in all three years of the projection window. Moreover, my inflation projections for 2023 and 2024, which forecast inflation rates similar to the SEP medians, would by year-end 2022, to me, satisfy the "on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time" threshold specified in the statement. Finally, while my assessment of maximum employment incorporates a wide range of indicators to assess the state of the labor market—including indicators of labor compensation, productivity, and price-cost markups—the employment data I look at, such as the Kansas City Fed's Labor Market Conditions Indicators, are historically highly correlated with the unemployment rate.
8
My expectation today is that the labor market by the end of 2022 will have reached my assessment of maximum employment if the unemployment rate has declined by then to the SEP median of modal projections of 3.8 percent.
Given this economic outlook and so long as inflation expectations remain well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal—which, based on the Fed staff's common inflation expectations (CIE) index, I judge at present to be the case—a policy normalization path similar to the median SEP dot plot on page 4 of our September 2021 projections would, under these conditions, be entirely consistent, to me, with our new flexible average inflation targeting framework and the policy rate reaction function I discussed in remarks here at Brookings in November 2020.
9
In the context of our new framework, it is important to note that while the ELB can be a constraint on monetary policy, the ELB is not a constraint on fiscal policy, and appropriate monetary policy under our new framework, to me, must—and certainly can—incorporate this reality. Indeed, under present circumstances, I judge that the support to aggregate demand from fiscal policy—including the roughly $2 trillion in accumulated excess savings accruing from (as yet) unspent transfer payments—in tandem with appropriate monetary policy, can fully offset the constraint, highlighted in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, that the ELB imposes on the ability of inflation-targeting monetary policy, acting on its own and in the absence of sufficient fiscal support, to restore, following a recession, maximum employment and price stability while keeping inflation expectations well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal.
10
Before I conclude, let me say a few words about our Treasury and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) purchase programs. In our December 2020 FOMC statement, we indicated that we would maintain the pace of Treasury and MBS purchases at $80 billion and $40 billion per month, respectively, until "substantial further progress" has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Since then, the economy has made progress toward these goals. At our meeting last week, the Committee decided to begin reducing the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $10 billion for Treasury securities and $5 billion for agency mortgage-backed securities. Beginning later this month, the Committee will increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $70 billion per month and of agency mortgage‑backed securities by at least $35 billion per month. Beginning in December, the Committee will increase its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $60 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $30 billion per month. The Committee judges that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, but it is prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. The Federal Reserve's ongoing purchases and holdings of securities will continue to foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses.
Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward to the conversation with Ben Bernanke, Philip Lane, and Rachana Shanbhogue.
References
Ahn, Hie Joo, and Chad Fulton (2020). "
Index of Common Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2.
——— (2021). "
Research Data Series: Index of Common Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 5.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2011). "When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?"
Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 119 (February), pp. 78–121.
Clarida, Richard H. (2020). "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences
," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.
——— (2021). "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework and Outcome-Based Forward Guidance
," speech delivered at "SOMC: The Federal Reserve's New Policy Framework," a forum sponsored by the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee, New York (via webcast), April 14.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2011). "What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?" in Daron Acemoglu and Michael Woodford, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2010,
vol. 25 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 59–112.
National Bureau of Economic Research, Business Cycle Dating Committee (2021). "
Determination of the April 2020 Trough in US Economic Activity
," announcement, July 19.
Powell, Jerome H. (2020). "
New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review
," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27.
Woodford, Michael (2011). "Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
vol 3 (January), pp. 1–35.
Woodford, Michael, and Yinxi Xie (2020). "
Fiscal and Monetary Stabilization Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Consequences of Limited Foresight
," NBER Working Paper Series 27521. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Burcu Duygan-Bump and Chiara Scotti for assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. See National Bureau of Economic Research (2021).
Return to text
3. The most recent SEP, released following the conclusion of the September 2021 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
4. More information on the jobs calculator can be found on the Atlanta Fed's website at
https://www.atlantafed.org/chcs/calculator
.
Return to text
5. The FOMC statements containing the guidance (see the fourth paragraph in each statement) are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
6. The revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, unanimously approved on August 27, 2020, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
. For a discussion of the elements that motivated the launch of the review and a summary of the key changes that were introduced, see Clarida (2020, 2021) and Powell (2020).
Return to text
7. Of course, data for December 2022 employment and 2022:Q4 GDP and PCE inflation will not be released until January 2023.
Return to text
8. The Labor Market Conditions Indicators can be found on the Kansas City Fed's website at
https://www.kansascityfed.org/data-and-trends/labor-market-conditions-indicators
.
Return to text
9. The Fed staff's CIE index—which is now updated quarterly on the Board's website—is a relevant indicator that this goal is being met. See Ahn and Fulton (2020, 2021).
Return to text
10. For a theoretical analysis of the fiscal and monetary policy mix at the ELB, see Woodford and Xie (2020). For studies of the government expenditure multiplier at the ELB, see Woodford (2011); Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011); and Eggertsson (2011).
Return to text


Discurso 62
==================================================
October 12, 2021
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the 2021 Institute of International Finance Annual Membership Meeting: Sustainable Economic Growth and Financial Stability in a Diverging, Decarbonizing, Digitizing, Indebted World, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the 2021 Institute of International Finance Annual Membership Meeting.
1
I regret that we are not meeting in person, but I look forward, as always, to a conversation with my good friend and one-time colleague Tim Adams. But first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook and Federal Reserve monetary policy.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
Indicators of economic activity and employment reveal that the economy continues to strengthen. Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a strong 6.4 percent pace in the first half of the year, and growth is widely expected to continue at a robust, if perhaps somewhat slower, pace in the second half of the year. If so, GDP growth this calendar year could be the fastest since 1983. That said, the data also indicate that a surge in COVID-19 cases in the summer and supply-chain bottlenecks held back economic activity in the third quarter.
As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. Job gains as measured by the payroll survey have averaged 550,000 per month over the past three months. Labor market progress this year, as measured by the Kansas City Fed's Labor Market Conditions Indicators, has been notable, with this index of 24 labor market indicators since December 2020 closing two-thirds of its shortfall relative to its pre-pandemic level.
2
Nonetheless, factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving obligations and ongoing fears of the virus, continue to weigh on employment and participation. Thus, the course of the labor market, and indeed that of the economy, continues to depend on the course of the virus.
Since February 2020, core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) price inflation is running at a 2.9 percent annual pace that is well above what I would consider to be a moderate overshoot of our 2 percent longer-run goal for inflation. Fully reopening the $20 trillion economy this year is taking longer and costing more than it did to shut it down last year. In particular, the reopening has been characterized by significant sectoral shifts in both aggregate demand and supply, and these shifts are causing widespread bottlenecks and triggering substantial changes in the relative price and wage structure of the economy. A similar reopening dynamic is playing out in other advanced economies, such as Canada and the United Kingdom. As these relative price adjustments work their way through the economy, measured inflation rises. But I continue to believe that the underlying rate inflation in the U.S. economy is hovering close to our 2 percent longer-run objective and, thus, that the unwelcome surge in inflation this year, once these relative price adjustments are complete and bottlenecks have unclogged, will in the end prove to be largely transitory. And this is a forecast that is shared by the vast majority of economists in the private sector, such as those surveyed by Bloomberg and Blue Chip. That said, I believe, as do most of my colleagues, that the risks to inflation are to the upside, and I continue to be attuned and attentive to underlying inflation trends, in particular measures of inflation expectations, including the Board staff's index of common inflation expectations.
3
As Chair Powell has indicated, if we did see indicators of inflation expectations moving up and running persistently above levels consistent with our price stability mandate, monetary policy would react to that. But that is not the case at present.
The September Decision and the Forward Guidance in Our FOMC Statement
Let me now say a few words about the decisions reached at our September FOMC meeting. Since our December 2020 meeting, the Committee has indicated that it will continue to maintain the pace of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities purchases at $80 billion and $40 billion per month, respectively, until "substantial further progress" has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
4
At our September meeting, the Committee continued to discuss the progress made toward these goals, and I myself believe that the "substantial further progress" standard has more than been met with regard to our price-stability mandate and has all but been met with regard to our employment mandate. If progress continues broadly as expected, the Committee in September judged that a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. At our meeting, we also discussed the appropriate pace of tapering asset purchases once economic conditions satisfy the criterion laid out in the Committee's guidance. While no decisions were made, participants generally view that, so long as the recovery remains on track, a gradual tapering of our asset purchases that concludes around the middle of next year may soon be warranted.
It is important to note that any future decision the Committee might make with regard to the pace of asset purchases will not be intended to carry a signal about the timing of a future decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, a policy decision for which we have articulated a different and substantially more stringent test. As we reaffirmed in September, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. At least half of the 18 FOMC participants in their Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) submissions projected that these necessary threshold conditions for liftoff will be met by December 2022, and all participants but 1 project that these conditions will be met by December 2023.
5
These projections are entirely consistent with the new monetary policy framework adopted unanimously by the Committee in August 2020.
6
In the context of our new framework, as I have noted before, while the effective lower bound (ELB) can be a constraint on monetary policy, the ELB is not a constraint on fiscal policy, and appropriate monetary policy under our new framework, to me, must—and certainly can—incorporate this reality. Indeed, under present circumstances, I judge that the support to aggregate demand from fiscal policy—including the nearly $2 trillion in accumulated excess savings accruing from (as yet) unspent transfer payments—in tandem with appropriate monetary policy, can fully offset the constraint, highlighted in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, that the ELB imposes on the ability of an inflation-targeting monetary policy, acting on its own and in the absence of sufficient fiscal support, to restore, following a recession, maximum employment and price stability while keeping inflation expectations well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal.
7
Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward, as always, to my conversation with Tim.
References
Ahn, Hie Joo, and Chad Fulton (2020).
"Index of Common Inflation Expectations,"
FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2.
——— (2021).
"Research Data Series: Index of Common Inflation Expectations,"
FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 5.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2011). "When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?"
Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 119 (February), pp. 78–121.
Clarida, Richard H. (2020).
"The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences,"
speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.
——— (2021).
"The Federal Reserve's New Framework and Outcome-Based Forward Guidance,"
speech delivered at "SOMC: The Federal Reserve's New Policy Framework," a forum sponsored by the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee, New York (via webcast), April 14.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2011). "What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?" in Daron Acemoglu and Michael Woodford, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2010,
vol. 25 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 59–112.
Powell, Jerome H. (2020).
"New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review,"
speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27.
Woodford, Michael (2011). "Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
vol 3 (January), pp. 1–35.
Woodford, Michael, and Yinxi Xie (2020).
"Fiscal and Monetary Stabilization Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Consequences of Limited Foresight,"
NBER Working Paper Series 27521. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. The Labor Market Conditions Indicators can be found on the Kansas City Fed's website at
https://www.kansascityfed.org/data-and-trends/labor-market-conditions-indicators
.
Return to text
3. The Fed staff's index of common inflation expectations—which is now updated quarterly on the Board's website—is a relevant indicator that this goal is being met. See Ahn and Fulton (2020, 2021).
Return to text
4. FOMC statements, including those issued since the December 2020 meeting, are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
5. The most recent SEP, released following the conclusion of the September 2021 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
6. The revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, unanimously approved on August 27, 2020, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
. For a discussion of the elements that motivated the launch of the review and a summary of the key changes that were introduced, see Clarida (2020, 2021) and Powell (2020).
Return to text
7. For a theoretical analysis of the fiscal and monetary policy mix at the ELB, see Woodford and Xie (2020). For studies of the government expenditure multiplier at the ELB, see Woodford (2011); Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011); and Eggertsson (2011).
Return to text


Discurso 63
==================================================
September 24, 2021
Introductory Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At "Fed Listens: Perspectives on the Pandemic Recovery," sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Nearly three years after we started holding Fed Listens events around the country, the program has proved to be even more valuable than we could have imagined. Its original purpose was to elicit broad feedback as part of our monetary policy framework review. However, the Fed has long viewed community outreach as a vital part of our economic understanding, and these discussions have delivered such value that Fed Listens has evolved to join the other regular staples of our outreach work.
These events enable us to hear directly from people on the ground, at the heart of the sectors and industries you represent, from communities across the country, to add tone, contour and greater depth to the nation's economic portrait. These insights are particularly valuable as we move through this challenging and precedent shattering period. The speed and intensity of this downturn – and the rapidity of the recovery in many areas – are without modern precedent.
I am very glad you could all join us today to offer your thoughts, and I want to thank you on behalf of the entire Federal Reserve System for both your presence today and for your continued feedback and participation.
Some of the issues you are confronting are shared across sectors, while others are unique to your fields. Most of you are contending with changed workplaces, from safety protocols whose half-lives are unclear to fundamental shifts in how your industries operate, in everything from feeding people to how movies are released. Business plans have been reworked, outlooks have been revised, and the future continues to be tinged with uncertainty.
While uncertainty often results in immobility for businesses, it can also spell opportunity, and the creativity and adaptability on display over the past 18 months have been among the few bright spots. I have been amazed and inspired by the flexibility and ingenuity, particularly that of small businesses, in shifting to meet the demands of a new reality.
All of us are very much looking forward to the discussion today. You provide a wealth of information by sharing your experiences and those of your colleagues, customers, and communities. That has always been crucial in how we conduct monetary policy but means even more in extraordinary times such as these.
I want to thank you again for providing that insight and look forward to the conversation.
Related Content
Fed Listens: Perspectives on the Pandemic Recovery
Fed Listens events


Discurso 64
==================================================
August 27, 2021
Monetary Policy in the Time of COVID
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the "Macroeconomic Policy in an Uneven Economy," economic policy  symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Seventeen months have passed since the U.S. economy faced the full force of the COVID-19 pandemic. This shock led to an immediate and unprecedented decline as large parts of the economy were shuttered to contain the spread of the disease.
The path of recovery has been a difficult one, and a good place to begin is by thanking those on the front line fighting the pandemic: the essential workers who kept the economy going, those who have cared for others in need, and those in medical research, business, and government, who came together to discover, produce, and widely distribute effective vaccines in record time. We should also keep in our thoughts those who have lost their lives from COVID, as well as their loved ones.
Strong policy support has fueled a vigorous but uneven recovery—one that is, in many respects, historically anomalous. In a reversal of typical patterns in a downturn, aggregate personal income rose rather than fell, and households massively shifted their spending from services to manufactured goods. Booming demand for goods and the strength and speed of the reopening have led to shortages and bottlenecks, leaving the COVID-constrained supply side unable to keep up. The result has been elevated inflation in durable goods—a sector that has experienced an annual inflation rate well below zero over the past quarter century.
1
Labor market conditions are improving but turbulent, and the pandemic continues to threaten not only health and life, but also economic activity. Many other advanced economies are experiencing similarly unusual conditions.
In my comments today, I will focus on the Fed's efforts to promote our maximum employment and price stability goals amid this upheaval, and suggest how lessons from history and a careful focus on incoming data and the evolving risks offer useful guidance for today's unique monetary policy challenges.
The Recession and Recovery So Far
The pandemic recession—the briefest yet deepest on record—displaced roughly 30 million workers in the space of two months.
2
The decline in output in the second quarter of 2020 was twice the full decline during the Great Recession of 2007–09.
3
But the pace of the recovery has exceeded expectations, with output surpassing its previous peak after only four quarters, less than half the time required following the Great Recession. As is typically the case, the recovery in employment has lagged that in output; nonetheless, employment gains have also come faster than expected.
4
The economic downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. In particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower-wage workers in the service sector and on African Americans and Hispanics.
The unevenness of the recovery can further be seen through the lens of the sectoral shift of spending into goods—particularly durable goods such as appliances, furniture, and cars—and away from services, particularly in-person services in areas such as travel and leisure (
figure 1
). As the pandemic struck, restaurant meals fell 45 percent, air travel 95 percent, and dentist visits 65 percent. Even today, with overall gross domestic product and consumption spending more than fully recovered, services spending remains about 7 percent below trend. Total employment is now 6 million below its February 2020 level, and 5 million of that shortfall is in the still-depressed service sector. In contrast, spending on durable goods has boomed since the start of the recovery and is now running about 20 percent above the pre-pandemic level. With demand outstripping pandemic-afflicted supply, rising durables prices are a principal factor lifting inflation well above our 2 percent objective.
Given the ongoing upheaval in the economy, some strains and surprises are inevitable. The job of monetary policy is to promote maximum employment and price stability as the economy works through this challenging period. I will turn now to a discussion of progress toward those goals.
The Path Ahead: Maximum Employment
The outlook for the labor market has brightened considerably in recent months. After faltering last winter, job gains have risen steadily over the course of this year and now average 832,000 over the past three months, of which almost 800,000 have been in services (
figure 2
). The pace of total hiring is faster than at any time in the recorded data before the pandemic. The levels of job openings and quits are at record highs, and employers report that they cannot fill jobs fast enough to meet returning demand.
These favorable conditions for job seekers should help the economy cover the considerable remaining ground to reach maximum employment. The unemployment rate has declined to 5.4 percent, a post-pandemic low, but is still much too high, and the reported rate understates the amount of labor market slack.
5
Long-term unemployment remains elevated, and the recovery in labor force participation has lagged well behind the rest of the labor market, as it has in past recoveries.
With vaccinations rising, schools reopening, and enhanced unemployment benefits ending, some factors that may be holding back job seekers are likely fading.
6
While the Delta variant presents a near-term risk, the prospects are good for continued progress toward maximum employment.
The Path Ahead: Inflation
The rapid reopening of the economy has brought a sharp run-up in inflation. Over the 12 months through July, measures of headline and core personal consumption expenditures inflation have run at 4.2 percent and 3.6 percent, respectively—well above our 2 percent longer-run objective.
7
Businesses and consumers widely report upward pressure on prices and wages. Inflation at these levels is, of course, a cause for concern. But that concern is tempered by a number of factors that suggest that these elevated readings are likely to prove temporary. This assessment is a critical and ongoing one, and we are carefully monitoring incoming data.
The dynamics of inflation are complex, and we assess the inflation outlook from a number of different perspectives, as I will now discuss.
1. The absence so far of broad-based inflation pressures
The spike in inflation is so far largely the product of a relatively narrow group of goods and services that have been directly affected by the pandemic and the reopening of the economy. Durable goods alone contributed about 1 percentage point to the latest 12‑month measures of headline and core inflation. Energy prices, which rebounded with the strong recovery, added another 0.8 percentage point to headline inflation, and from long experience we expect the inflation effects of these increases to be transitory. In addition, some prices—for example, for hotel rooms and airplane tickets—declined sharply during the recession and have now moved back up close to pre-pandemic levels. The 12-month window we use in computing inflation now captures the rebound in prices but not the initial decline, temporarily elevating reported inflation. These effects, which are adding a few tenths to measured inflation, should wash out over time.
We consult a range of measures meant to capture whether price increases for particular items are spilling over into broad-based inflation. These include trimmed mean measures and measures excluding durables and computed from just before the pandemic. These measures generally show inflation at or close to our 2 percent longer-run objective (
figure 3
). We would be concerned at signs that inflationary pressures were spreading more broadly through the economy.
2. Moderating inflation in higher-inflation items
We are also directly monitoring the prices of particular goods and services most affected by the pandemic and the reopening, and are beginning to see a moderation in some cases as shortages ease. Used car prices, for example, appear to have stabilized; indeed, some price indicators are beginning to fall. If that continues, as many analysts predict, then used car prices will soon be pulling measured inflation down, as they did for much of the past decade.
8
This same dynamic of upward inflation pressure dissipating and, in some cases, reversing seems likely to play out in durables more generally. Over the 25 years preceding the pandemic, durables prices actually declined, with inflation averaging negative 1.9 percent per year (
figure 5
).
9
As supply problems have begun to resolve, inflation in durable goods other than autos has now slowed and may be starting to fall. It seems unlikely that durables inflation will continue to contribute importantly over time to overall inflation. We will be looking for evidence that supports or undercuts that expectation.
3. Wages
We also assess whether wage increases are consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. Wage increases are essential to support a rising standard of living and are generally, of course, a welcome development. But if wage increases were to move materially and persistently above the levels of productivity gains and inflation, businesses would likely pass those increases on to customers, a process that could become the sort of "wage–price spiral" seen at times in the past.
10
Today we see little evidence of wage increases that might threaten excessive inflation (
figure 6
). Broad-based measures of wages that adjust for compositional changes in the labor force, such as the employment cost index and the Atlanta Wage Growth Tracker, show wages moving up at a pace that appears consistent with our longer-term inflation objective. We will continue to monitor this carefully.
4. Longer-term inflation expectations
Policymakers and analysts generally believe that, as long as longer-term inflation expectations remain anchored, policy can and should look through temporary swings in inflation. Our monetary policy framework emphasizes that anchoring longer-term expectations at 2 percent is important for both maximum employment and price stability.
We carefully monitor a wide range of indicators of longer-term inflation expectations. These measures today are at levels broadly consistent with our 2 percent objective (
figure 4
). Because measures of inflation expectations are individually noisy, we also focus on common patterns across the measures. One approach to summarizing these patterns is the Board staff's index of common inflation expectations (CIE), which combines information from a broad range of survey and market-based measures.
11
This index captures a general move down in expectations starting around 2014, a time when inflation was running persistently below 2 percent. More recently, the index shows a welcome reversal of that decline and is now at levels more consistent with our 2 percent objective.
Longer-term inflation expectations have moved much less than actual inflation or near-term expectations, suggesting that households, businesses, and market participants also believe that current high inflation readings are likely to prove transitory and that, in any case, the Fed will keep inflation close to our 2 percent objective over time.
12
5. The prevalence of global disinflationary forces over the past quarter century
Finally, it is worth noting that, since the 1990s, inflation in many advanced economies has run somewhat below 2 percent even in good times (
figure 7
). The pattern of low inflation likely reflects sustained disinflationary forces, including technology, globalization and perhaps demographic factors, as well as a stronger and more successful commitment by central banks to maintain price stability.
13
In the United States, unemployment ran below 4 percent for about two years before the pandemic, while inflation ran at or below 2 percent. Wages did move up across the income spectrum—a welcome development—but not by enough to lift price inflation consistently to 2 percent. While the underlying global disinflationary factors are likely to evolve over time, there is little reason to think that they have suddenly reversed or abated. It seems more likely that they will continue to weigh on inflation as the pandemic passes into history.
14
We will continue to monitor incoming inflation data against each of these assessments.
To sum up, the baseline outlook is for continued progress toward maximum employment, with inflation returning to levels consistent with our goal of inflation averaging 2 percent over time. Let me now turn to how the baseline outlook and the associated risks and uncertainties figure in our monetary policymaking.
Implications for Monetary Policy
The period from 1950 through the early 1980s provides two important lessons for managing the risks and uncertainties we face today. The early days of stabilization policy in the 1950s taught monetary policymakers not to attempt to offset what are likely to be temporary fluctuations in inflation.
15
Indeed, responding may do more harm than good, particularly in an era where policy rates are much closer to the effective lower bound even in good times. The main influence of monetary policy on inflation can come after a lag of a year or more. If a central bank tightens policy in response to factors that turn out to be temporary, the main policy effects are likely to arrive after the need has passed. The ill-timed policy move unnecessarily slows hiring and other economic activity and pushes inflation lower than desired. Today, with substantial slack remaining in the labor market and the pandemic continuing, such a mistake could be particularly harmful. We know that extended periods of unemployment can mean lasting harm to workers and to the productive capacity of the economy.
16
History also teaches, however, that central banks cannot take for granted that inflation due to transitory factors will fade. The 1970s saw two periods in which there were large increases in energy and food prices, raising headline inflation for a time. But when the direct effects on headline inflation eased, core inflation continued to run persistently higher than before. One likely contributing factor was that the public had come to generally expect higher inflation—one reason why we now monitor inflation expectations so carefully.
17
Central banks have always faced the problem of distinguishing transitory inflation spikes from more troublesome developments, and it is sometimes difficult to do so with confidence in real time. At such times, there is no substitute for a careful focus on incoming data and evolving risks. If sustained higher inflation were to become a serious concern, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) would certainly respond and use our tools to assure that inflation runs at levels that are consistent with our goal.
Incoming data should provide more evidence that some of the supply–demand imbalances are improving, and more evidence of a continued moderation in inflation, particularly in goods and services prices that have been most affected by the pandemic. We also expect to see continued strong job creation. And we will be learning more about the Delta variant's effects. For now, I believe that policy is well positioned; as always, we are prepared to adjust policy as appropriate to achieve our goals.
That brings me to a concluding word on the path ahead for monetary policy. The Committee remains steadfast in our oft-expressed commitment to support the economy for as long as is needed to achieve a full recovery. The changes we made last year to our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy are well suited to address today's challenges.
We have said that we would continue our asset purchases at the current pace until we see substantial further progress toward our maximum employment and price stability goals, measured since last December, when we first articulated this guidance. My view is that the "substantial further progress" test has been met for inflation. There has also been clear progress toward maximum employment. At the FOMC's recent July meeting, I was of the view, as were most participants, that if the economy evolved broadly as anticipated, it could be appropriate to start reducing the pace of asset purchases this year. The intervening month has brought more progress in the form of a strong employment report for July, but also the further spread of the Delta variant. We will be carefully assessing incoming data and the evolving risks. Even after our asset purchases end, our elevated holdings of longer-term securities will continue to support accommodative financial conditions.
The timing and pace of the coming reduction in asset purchases will not be intended to carry a direct signal regarding the timing of interest rate liftoff, for which we have articulated a different and substantially more stringent test. We have said that we will continue to hold the target range for the federal funds rate at its current level until the economy reaches conditions consistent with maximum employment, and inflation has reached 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. We have much ground to cover to reach maximum employment, and time will tell whether we have reached 2 percent inflation on a sustainable basis.
These are challenging times for the public we serve, as the pandemic and its unprecedented toll on health and economic activity linger. But I will end on a positive note. Before the pandemic, we all saw the extraordinary benefits that a strong labor market can deliver to our society. Despite today's challenges, the economy is on a path to just such a labor market, with high levels of employment and participation, broadly shared wage gains, and inflation running close to our price stability goal. Thank you very much.
References
Bodenstein, Martin, Christopher J. Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2008). "Optimal Monetary Policy with Distinct Core and Headline Inflation Rates,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 55, supplement (October), pp. S18–S33.
Bordo, Michael D., and Athanasios Orphanides, eds. (2013).
The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking
. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Canon, Maria E., Marianna Kudlyak, and Marisa Reed (2015). "
Aging and the Economy: The Japanese Experience
," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
Regional Economist,
vol. 23 (October), pp. 12–13.
Davis, Steven J., and Till von Wachter (2011). "
Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Fall, pp. 1–72.
Forbes, Kristin J. (2019). "
Inflation Dynamics: Dead, Dormant, or Determined Abroad? (PDF)
"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Fall, pp. 257–319.
Friedman, Milton (1958). "The Supply of Money and Changes in Prices and Output," in The Relationship of Prices to Economic Stability and Growth: Compendium of Papers Submitted by Panelists Appearing before the Joint Economic Committee, Joint Committee Print, March 31, 85 Cong. Washington: Government Printing Office, pp. 241–56.
Goodhart, Charles, and Manoj Pradhan (2020). The Great Demographic Reversal: Ageing Societies, Waning Inequality, and an Inflation Revival. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007). "
Headline versus Core Inflation in the Conduct of Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the Business Cycles, International Transmission and Macroeconomic Policies Conference, HEC Montreal, Montreal, October 20.
Obstfeld, Maurice (2020). "Global Dimensions of U.S. Monetary Policy,"
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 16 (February), pp. 73–132.
Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2013). "Monetary Policy Mistakes and the Evolution of Inflation Expectations," in Michael D. Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides, eds.,
The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking
. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 255–88.
Powell, Jerome H. (2019). "
Challenges for Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at "Challenges for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23.
1. See, for example, figure 5.
Return to text
2. This figure includes both the decline in the number reporting themselves as employed in the Household Survey as well as the BLS' estimate of those who misreported themselves as employed but not at work rather than on temporary layoff.
Return to text
3. From the peak to the trough quarter, gross domestic product dropped 10 percent last year, compared with 3.8 percent in the 2007–09 recession.
Return to text
4. For example, the consensus forecast reported by Blue Chip Economic Indicators in April 2020 put the unemployment rate in the second quarter of 2021 at 7.4 percent, compared with the actual value of 5.9 percent.
Return to text
5. An alternative measure that adjusts for the misclassification of some unemployed workers as employed but not at work (as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics) and for diminished labor force participation induced by the pandemic (as estimated by Federal Reserve Board staff) currently stands at 7.8 percent, also a post-pandemic low.
Return to text
6. Factors holding back job gains are more thoroughly discussed in the July 2021
Monetary Policy Report,
which is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/20210709_mprfullreport.pdf
.
Return to text
7. These values reflect data through July as released on August 27, 2021. All other statements about personal consumption expenditures and associated prices reflect data through June and do not include the August 27, 2021 release covering July.
Return to text
8. Declines in used car prices would begin holding down 12-month inflation once most of the earlier price increases have fallen out of the 12-month window.
Return to text
9. The lower inflation in durable goods is probably due to a number factors, including faster productivity growth in durable goods than in services and globalization.
Return to text
10. If wages rise in line with inflation and labor productivity growth, then real unit labor costs (or the labor cost of producing one unit of output) to businesses are constant. Wages may grow slower or faster than inflation plus productivity growth for extended periods because of changing structural factors without being reflected in inflation. Ultimately, however, persistently rising real unit labor costs will put upward pressure on prices.
Return to text
11. The way the CIE combines the underlying measures means that it will tend not to be affected by underlying movements that are unique to individual measures; the CIE will reflect movements that are more common across underlying measures.
Return to text
12. On a Q4-over-Q4 basis, the August 13, 2021, Survey of Professional Forecasters reports a consensus forecast for total personal consumption expenditures inflation of 4.1 percent, 2.2 percent, and 2.3 percent for 2021 to 2023, respectively. The corresponding numbers for core inflation are 3.7 percent, 2.2 percent, and 2.1 percent, respectively. The August 10, 2021, Blue Chip Economic Indicators Forecast presents similar consensus forecasts for 2021 and 2022.
Return to text
13. For views on this, see Canon, Kudlyak, and Reed (2015), Forbes (2019), Goodhart and Pradhan (2020), Obstfeld (2020).
Return to text
14. For an opposing view, see Goodhart and Pradhan (2020), who argue that the globalization and demographic factors that had been fueling global disinflationary forces are now reversing and could give rise to an inflationary period. Even if we are near an inflection point, as Goodhart and Pradhan argue, demographic forces move slowly relative to the near-term policy horizon I am discussing here today.
Return to text
15. As I discussed here two years ago, Milton Friedman first made this argument referring to the stop-and-go policies in the 1950s. See Powell (2019) and Friedman (1958, p. 241). Bodenstein, Erceg, and Guerrieri (2008) and Mishkin (2007) illustrate the problems that reacting to transitory sources of inflation can cause using two of the Board staff's models.
Return to text
16. See, for example, Davis and von Wachter (2011).
Return to text
17. See, for example, Orphanides and Williams (2013) on the role of de-anchored inflation expectations. This paper is in Bordo and Orphanides (2013), which discusses a wide range of related issues.
Return to text
figure 1
figure 2
figure 3
figure 4
figure 5
figure 6
figure 7
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 65
==================================================
August 17, 2021
Welcoming Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At Conversation with the Chair: A Virtual Teacher and Student Town Hall Meeting, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Gigi and Scott, and thanks to everyone for your work in bringing us together today, particularly the Economic Education Group. Congratulations on the launch of Economic Education Month as well. We're very proud of this initiative and looking forward to what you have in store for us in October.
It's a pleasure to be here, albeit in a very different format than we're used to. The downside is that we don't get to connect in quite the same way as we do in person. The upside is that we're able to include a lot more people. And wear much more comfortable clothes.
Before I turn to your questions, I want to say a few words to recognize the incredibly powerful work you all do as teachers. It would be important to mention this in any year, but especially now, in the 17th month of our upended reality. At the Fed, we take the value and responsibility of public service pretty seriously, and there really is no greater contribution to the common good than teaching.
The pandemic has been tough on everyone, but it has asked more of some than others. Making it through this time has been no small feat for anyone, but teachers deserve distinct praise and appreciation. Educators have had to restructure their teaching, adapt to new platforms, and help their students make their way through added stresses and pitfalls. That must have been especially tough without the day-to-day interactions that help you connect. It is clear that so many teachers have gone above and beyond the call of duty to remain a consistent, reliable resource for their students.
Parents deserve a shout-out as well for their part in helping reconstruct something as enormous and consequential as our entire education system.
And students have also shown remarkable courage and resilience. For all of us, daily life has been disrupted, milestones like birthdays and graduations have been missed, and a once-in-a-lifetime crisis has cast a shadow of insecurity and uncertainty. But to take on that burden as a formative experience is extraordinary. You should all feel proud.
Finding the bright side to the past 17 months is not easy, but the crisis has given us a unique opportunity to see the big picture and consider our place in it. This is a historical inflection point, and this generation of students is in a position to turn its lessons into profound tools of change.
And I hope some of you will use those tools in public service.
The students here today are the policymakers and legislators of the future. Your teachers are the ones with the daunting task of preparing you for that future.
You will see the world differently than your predecessors. You have been forced, sooner than most people, to consider what in life is truly important. You have seen a world upended, but you have also seen a world that is rapidly changing—sometimes more in one week than some of us have experienced over the course of decades. I hope this will cause you to think about how you want to make your mark, knowing that things do change, and sometimes they change quickly.
This is an extraordinary time, and I believe that it will result in an extraordinary generation. As long as we continue to have extraordinary educators to guide them there.
Education is the foundation of our economy, indeed, of our society. Teachers have always been tasked with nurturing and overseeing our most valuable national resource. It is the highest call within the higher calling of public service. I want to thank all of the teachers—those here today and the rest across the country—as well as the parents and students who have come together to make it through the past year and a half.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.


Discurso 66
==================================================
August 04, 2021
Outlooks, Outcomes, and Prospects for U.S. Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Outlooks and Outcomes for the U.S. Economy
With the release of the gross domestic product (GDP) data last week, we learned that the U.S. economy in the second quarter of this year transitioned from economic recovery to economic expansion.
1
Given the catastrophic collapse in U.S. economic activity in the first half of 2020 as a result of the global pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it, few forecasters could have expected—or even dared to hope—in the spring of last year that the recovery in GDP, from the sharpest decline in activity since the Great Depression, would be either so robust or as rapid. In retrospect, it seems clear that timely and targeted monetary and fiscal policy actions—unprecedented in both scale and scope—provided essential and significant support to the economic recovery as it got under way last year. Indeed, just recently, the National Bureau of Economic Research's Business Cycle Dating Committee determined that the recession that began in March of last year ended in April, making it not only the deepest recession on record, but also the briefest.
2
Moreover, with the development and distribution of several remarkably effective vaccines, the monetary and fiscal policies presently in place should continue to support the strong expansion in economic activity that is expected to be realized this year, although, obviously, the rapid spread of the Delta variant among the still considerable fraction of the population that is unvaccinated is clearly a downside risk for the outlook. That said, under the latest Congressional Budget Office (CBO) baseline forecast, the economy by the end of 2021 will have entirely closed the output gap opened up by the recession. If so, this would be the most rapid return following a recession to the CBO estimate of the trend level of real GDP in 50 years.
Importantly, while it is customary in business cycle analysis to date the transition from the recovery phase to the expansion phase according to the calendar quarter in which the level of real GDP first exceeds the previous business cycle's peak, in past U.S. business cycles, the recovery in employment has always lagged the recovery in GDP, and this cycle is no exception. Indeed, at the end of the second quarter of this year, even though the level of real GDP was 0.8 percent above the level reached at the previous business cycle peak, the level of employment as measured by the household survey remained about 7 million below the level reached at the previous business cycle peak. So while it is accurate to say we are in the expansion phase of the cycle in terms of economic activity, we remain in the recovery phase of the cycle in terms of aggregate employment.
In June, the Federal Reserve released its most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) for GDP, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate.
3
The SEP provides summary information about the empirical distribution of the individual modal projections at the time of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting submitted by each of the FOMC participants (currently 6 Governors and 12 Reserve Bank presidents). Each individual submits projections for the modal, or most likely, outcome for each variable in the survey under his or her assessment of the appropriate monetary policy path.
4
Of course, if a participant's subjective distributions for possible outcomes for GDP, unemployment, and inflation are symmetric, the mode of each distribution submitted by each participant will equal its mean (and median), but in general, there is no presumption that the subjective distributions—or, for that matter, observed empirical distributions—for these variables are symmetric. Indeed, an important addition to the SEP introduced in December 2020 is a set of charts showing the historical evolution of diffusion indexes for the assessment of the balance of risks to the GDP, unemployment, and inflation projections submitted by each participant.
In the June SEP round, my individual projections for GDP growth and the unemployment rate turned out to be quite close to the path of SEP medians for each of these variables over the 2021–23 projection window. Under the "median of modes" outlook in the SEP, GDP growth this year is projected to be 7 percent on a Q4-over-Q4 basis, which, if realized, would represent the fastest four-quarter GDP growth since the 1980s. Under the projections, GDP growth does step down to 3.3 percent in 2022 and further to 2.4 percent in 2023, but to a pace that still exceeds the projected pace of long-run trend growth in all three years of the projection window. Not surprisingly, the projected path of robust GDP growth in the SEP translates into rapid declines in the projected SEP path for the unemployment rate, which is projected to fall to 4.5 percent by the end of this year, 3.8 percent by the end of 2022, and 3.5 percent by the end of 2023. This modal projection for the path of the unemployment rate is, according to the Atlanta Fed jobs calculator, consistent with a rebound in labor force participation to its estimated demographic trend and is also consistent with cumulative employment gains this year and next that, by the end of 2022, eliminate the 7 million "employment gap" relative to the previous cycle peak I mentioned earlier.
5
As is the case for GDP growth and the unemployment rate, my projections for headline and core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation are also similar to the paths of the SEP median of modal projections for these variables. Under the projected SEP path for inflation, core PCE inflation surges to at least 3 percent this year before reverting back to 2.1 percent for the next two years. Thus, the modal baseline outlook for inflation over the three-year projection window reflects the judgment, shared with many outside forecasters, that most of the inflation overshoot relative to the longer-run goal of 2 percent will, in the end, prove to be transitory. But, as I have noted before, there is no doubt that it is taking longer to fully reopen a $20 trillion economy than it did to shut it down. Although in a number of sectors of the economy the imbalances between demand and supply—including labor supply—are substantial, I do continue to judge that these imbalances are likely to dissipate over time as the labor market and global supply chains eventually adjust and, importantly, do so without putting persistent upward pressure on price inflation, wage gains adjusted for productivity, and the 2 percent longer-run inflation objective. But let me be clear on two points. First, if, as projected, core PCE inflation this year does come in at, or certainly above, 3 percent, I will consider that much more than a "moderate" overshoot of our 2 percent longer-run inflation objective. Second, as always, there are risks to any outlook, and I believe that the risks to my outlook for inflation are to the upside.
Prospects for U.S. Monetary Policy
In September 2020, the FOMC introduced—and since then has, at each subsequent meeting, reaffirmed—outcome-based, threshold guidance that specifies three conditions that the Committee expects will be met before it considers increasing the target range for the federal funds rate, currently 0 to 25 basis points.
6
This guidance in September of last year brought the forward guidance on the federal funds rate in the statement into alignment with the new policy framework adopted in August 2020.
7
To quote from the statement, these conditions are that "labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time."
While, as Chair Powell indicated last week, we are clearly a ways away from considering raising interest rates and this is certainly not something on the radar screen right now, if the outlook for inflation and outlook for unemployment I summarized earlier turn out to be the actual outcomes for inflation and unemployment realized over the forecast horizon, then I believe that these three necessary conditions for raising the target range for the federal funds rate will have been met by year-end 2022.
8
Core PCE inflation since February 2020—a calculation window that smooths out any base effects resulting from "round trip" declines and rebounds in the price levels of COVID-19-sensitive sectors and, coincidentally, also measures the average rate of core PCE inflation since hitting the effective lower bound (ELB) in March 2020—is running at 2.7 percent through June 2021 and is projected to remain above 2 percent in all three years of the projection window. Moreover, my inflation projections for 2022 and 2023, which forecast somewhat higher inflation than do the SEP medians, would also, to me, satisfy the "on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time" threshold specified in the statement. Finally, while my assessment of maximum employment incorporates a wide range of indicators to assess the state of the labor market—including indicators of labor compensation, productivity, and price-cost markups—the employment data I look at, such as the Kansas City Fed's Labor Market Conditions Indicators, are historically highly correlated with the unemployment rate.
9
My expectation today is that the labor market by the end of 2022 will have reached my assessment of maximum employment if the unemployment rate has declined by then to the SEP median of modal projections of 3.8 percent.
Given this outlook and so long as inflation expectations remain well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal—which, based on the Fed staff's common inflation expectations (CIE) index, I judge at present to be the case and which I project will remain true over the forecast horizon—commencing policy normalization in 2023 would, under these conditions, be entirely consistent with our new flexible average inflation targeting framework.
10
I note that under the June SEP median of modal projections, annualized PCE inflation since the new framework was adopted in August 2020 is projected to average 2.6 percent through year-end 2022 and 2.5 percent through year-end 2023.
11
In the context of our new framework, it is important to note that while the ELB can be a constraint on monetary policy, the ELB is not a constraint on fiscal policy, and appropriate monetary policy under our new framework, to me, must—and certainly can—incorporate this reality. Indeed, under present circumstances, I judge that the support to aggregate demand from fiscal policy—including the more than $2 trillion in accumulated excess savings accruing from (as yet) unspent transfer payments—in tandem with appropriate monetary policy, can fully offset the constraint, highlighted in our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, that the ELB imposes on the ability of an inflation-targeting monetary policy, acting on its own and in the absence of sufficient fiscal support, to restore, following a recession, maximum employment and price stability while keeping inflation expectations well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal.
12
Before I conclude, let me say a few words about our Treasury and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) purchase programs. In our December 2020 FOMC statement, we indicated, and have reaffirmed since then, that we will maintain the pace of Treasury and MBS purchases at $80 billion and $40 billion per month, respectively, until "substantial further progress" has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Since then, the economy has made progress toward these goals. At our meeting last week, the Committee reviewed some considerations around how our asset purchases might be adjusted, including their pace and composition, once economic conditions warrant a change. Participants expect that the economy will continue to move toward our standard of "substantial further progress." In coming meetings, the Committee will again assess the economy's progress toward our goals. As we have said, we will provide advance notice before making any changes to our purchases.
The outlook I have described in these remarks is, of course, only one of many possible paths that the economy may take. I began by noting that the recovery to date has been surprising, and it is plausible—indeed, probable—that more surprises are in store. The economic outlook is always uncertain, both because new shocks can arrive—which, by their nature, cannot be foreseen—and because our knowledge of the workings of the economy is imperfect. Additionally, the recovery and expansion following the pandemic are unlike any we have ever seen, and it will serve us well to remain humble in predicting the future. In light of these uncertainties, the Committee is rightly basing its judgments on outcomes, not just the outlook. Looking ahead, our policy decisions will continue to depend on the data in hand at the time, along with their implications for the outlook and associated risks.
Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward, as always, to my conversation with Adam Posen.
References
Ahn, Hie Joo, and Chad Fulton (2020). "
Index of Common Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2.
——— (2021). "
Research Data Series: Index of Common Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 5.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2011). "When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Large?"
Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 119 (February), pp. 78–121.
Clarida, Richard H. (2020). "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences
," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.
——— (2021). "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework and Outcome-Based Forward Guidance
," speech delivered at "SOMC: The Federal Reserve's New Policy Framework," a forum sponsored by the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee, New York (via webcast), April 14.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2011). "What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?" in Daron Acemoglu and Michael Woodford, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2010,
vol. 25 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 59–112.
National Bureau of Economic Research, Business Cycle Dating Committee (2021). "
Determination of the April 2020 Trough in US Economic Activity
," announcement, July 19.
Powell, Jerome H. (2020). "
New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review
," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27.
Woodford, Michael (2011). "Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
vol 3 (January), pp. 1–35.
Woodford, Michael, and Yinxi Xie (2020). "
Fiscal and Monetary Stabilization Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Consequences of Limited Foresight
," NBER Working Paper Series 27521. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Burcu Duygan-Bump and Chiara Scotti for assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. See National Bureau of Economic Research (2021).
Return to text
3. The most recent SEP, released following the conclusion of the June 2021 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
4. "Appropriate monetary policy" is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Additional information is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20210616.htm
.
Return to text
5. More information on the jobs calculator can be found on the Atlanta Fed's website at
https://www.atlantafed.org/chcs/calculator
.
Return to text
6. The FOMC statements containing the guidance (see the fourth paragraph in each statement) are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
7. The revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, unanimously approved on August 27, 2020, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
. For a discussion of the elements that motivated the launch of the review and a summary of the key changes that were introduced, see Clarida (2020, 2021) and Powell (2020).
Return to text
8. Of course, data for December 2022 employment and 2022:Q4 GDP and PCE inflation will not be released until January 2023.
Return to text
9. The Labor Market Conditions Indicators can be found on the Kansas City Fed's website at
https://www.kansascityfed.org/data-and-trends/labor-market-conditions-indicators
.
Return to text
10. The Fed staff's CIE index—which is now updated quarterly on the Board's website—is a relevant indicator that this goal is being met. See Ahn and Fulton (2020, 2021).
Return to text
11. The corresponding annualized average rate of PCE inflation since February 2020 under the SEP median projections is 2.3 percent through 2022 and 2023.
Return to text
12. For a theoretical analysis of the fiscal and monetary policy mix at the ELB, see Woodford and Xie (2020), and for studies of the government expenditure multiplier at the ELB, see Woodford (2011); Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011); and Eggertsson (2011).
Return to text


Discurso 67
==================================================
May 17, 2021
Sovereign Markets, Global Factors
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At "Fostering a Resilient Economy and Financial System: The Role of Central Banks" 25th Annual Financial Markets Conference, sponsored by the Center for Financial Innovation and Stability, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Amelia Island, FL (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Good morning, and thank you, Raphael. I am delighted to participate in the 25th Financial Markets Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which this year focuses on the role of central banks in fostering a resilient economy and financial system.
1
Central banks can indeed make important contributions to the resilience of the economy and the financial system. In the case of the Federal Reserve, our responsibilities include ensuring that banks are well supervised and regulated, working with other government agencies through the Financial Stability Oversight Council to promote financial stability, and, of course, conducting a U.S. monetary policy that aims to achieve our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. As the title of my talk suggests, my remarks today will focus on the importance of some specific global financial linkages that are relevant to the execution and communication of U.S. monetary policy aimed at achieving our domestic mandates.
Signs of financial globalization are abundant and evident across markets for many asset classes. But why and in what possible ways is financial globalization relevant for national monetary policies charged with achieving domestic mandates? A comprehensive and complete answer to this fundamental question is, of course, beyond the scope of a single speech, and so in my remarks today, I will focus specifically on two ways in which the integration and globalization of sovereign bond markets is relevant to the execution and communication of national monetary policies.
Central banks rightly pay a lot of attention to domestic sovereign bond yields "across the curve" for at least two reasons. First, yield curves for nominal and inflation-indexed bonds provide useful—if also noisy—information about the expected future path of the policy rate, inflation, the business cycle, and the term premium required to hold sovereign bonds. Second, yields on long-maturity bonds represent, generally, a key channel in the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy and, specifically, are a fundamental building block markets use to discount cash flows relevant for valuing financial assets. To anticipate my bottom line, the message of this speech is that global integration of sovereign bond markets has important implications not only for how central banks extract relevant signals from observed yields on bonds issued by the domestic sovereign, but also for how central banks calibrate the transmission of policy and policy guidance to the real economy via the yields on long-maturity bonds that are relevant for saving, investment, and asset valuation.
Sovereign Yields Embed Global Factors
There is a rich academic and practitioner literature devoted to modeling and interpreting fluctuations in domestic sovereign yield curves. A fundamental empirical regularity that motivates much of this research is that, across time and geography, yields along any given sovereign curve tend to rise and fall—and steepen and flatten—together over time. This empirical regularity led Litterman and Scheinkman (1991) to hypothesize and demonstrate that in the market for U.S. Treasury securities, a very small number of common factors—two or, at most, three—are able to account not only for most of the time-series variation, but also for the cross-sectional dispersion in yields across the entire Treasury curve. Moreover, the two most empirically important factors extracted statistically from the Treasury yield curve have intuitive geometric interpretations as "level" and "slope." The "level" factor has approximately an equal effect on yields across the maturity spectrum—thus, changes in the level factor are often referred to as "parallel shifts" in the yield curve—and accounts for most of the variance in yields across the full range of maturities. The "slope" factor has an effect that is increasing (monotonically) in maturity—thus, changes in the slope factor are often referred to as "steepening" or "flattening" pivots in the yield curve.
The original Litterman and Scheinkman factor model, with its geometric interpretation of level and slope factors, has held up remarkably well over the ensuing three decades and has been replicated for sovereign yield curves across scores of countries around the world, revealing similar regularities. Indeed, many, if not most, major central banks—and certainly their central bank watchers—estimate yield curve models and extract the factors that are reflected in their domestic sovereign yield curves. So, for example, for the three major economies included in
figure 1
, one can easily extract—using the methodology developed in Diebold and Li (2006)—on a country-by-country basis, U.S., U.K., and German level factors as well as U.S., U.K., and German slope factors. As is clear from figure 1, level and slope factors extracted from these individual sovereign yield curves are highly correlated across these major sovereign bond markets.
Economic theory suggests at least two reasons why the factors embedded in sovereign yield curves may be correlated across countries. First, this correlation will be present if the underlying macro fundamentals—for example, productivity growth, saving–investment imbalances, and longer-term inflation expectations—that drive the factors are correlated across countries.
2
Second, as is emphasized in Clarida (2019c) and Obstfeld (2020), this correlation will also be present if countries are tightly financially integrated even if fundamentals themselves are independent across countries.
3
Interpreting the Global Level Factor
From any set of level and slope factors extracted across a collection of sovereign yield curves, one can in turn extract a global level factor and a global slope factor that account for the correlation among the country-specific level and slope factors.
4
As can be seen in figure 1, the global level factor (the blue line) accounts for most of the evident downward trend and much of the variation relative to that trend in the estimated U.S., U.K., and German level factors. But what is this global level factor? Plausibly, the global level factor embedded in these three sovereign yield curves reflects the contribution of possibly several global macro fundamental drivers—including global productivity growth, the balance between global saving and investment, and longer-term inflation expectations—and likely also other "market" or "technical" factors specific to the trading of these sovereigns in the global bond market.
As can be seen in figure 2, however, most of the trend and variation in the global level factor about this trend can be accounted for by the evolution of estimates of the neutral real interest rates in these countries.
5
Figure 2
plots the global level factor against a simple average of the Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017, henceforth HLW) time-series estimates of $$r\ast\ $$—the neutral real interest rate consistent with trend growth and stable inflation—for the United States, the United Kingdom, and Germany. Now, while it is certainly intuitive that an $$r\ast\ $$ index for these countries would be correlated with the global level factor extracted from their yield curves, the degree to which this simple index can account for the trend and variation in the global level factor around this trend is striking. And because central banks, including the Federal Reserve, typically channel Milton Friedman (1968) and believe that the evolution of $$r\ast\ $$ primarily reflects nonmonetary factors that are beyond the central bank's control, an "$$r\ast\ $$ theory" of the level factor—if true—has important implications for how central banks extract signal from noise from sovereign yield curves as well as for how they calibrate the stance of monetary policy consistent with a credible inflation target. Under this interpretation, and as was anticipated years ago by Greenspan (2005), Bernanke (2005), Clarida (2005), and others, credible inflation-targeting central banks operating in an integrated global capital market—at least when they are operating away from their effective lower bound (ELB)—are primarily in the yield curve "slope" business, but much less so in the yield curve "level" business.
6
Figure 3
shows the relationship between the yield on a 10-year Treasury note and an estimate of the neutral nominal U.S. policy rate, which I set equal to the HLW estimate of $$r\ast\ $$ for the United States plus a 2 percent inflation objective, a proxy for the neutral nominal interest rate when longer-term inflation expectations are anchored at the 2 percent target. As is evident from the figure and as can be verified econometrically, there has been since at least the 1990s a stable, mean-reverting dynamic relationship between the benchmark nominal Treasury yield and a neutral nominal interest rate proxy derived from the HLW time-series estimates for $$r\ast\ $$ in the United States.
Interpreting the Slope Factor
I would now like to illustrate what I mean when I say that the slope of the yield curve is an important channel through which monetary policy is transmitted. Figure 4 plots the Diebold-Li (DL) slope factor for the United States—which is included in figure 1—against the spread between the HLW estimate of the U.S. neutral nominal policy rate and the actual federal funds rate (hereafter the "policy rate spread"). As is evident from
figure 4
, most of the variation in the DL slope factor for the Treasury yield curve can be accounted for by changes in the U.S. policy rate spread.
7
A simple regression over the 1999:Q1 to 2019:Q4 sample of the slope factor on the policy rate spread shown in figure 4 yields an
R
2
of 0.84 with a coefficient on the policy rate spread of 1.23. In other words, over the past 20 years, more than three-fourths of the variance of the Treasury slope factor can be accounted for by the policy rate spread, which is obviously something the Federal Reserve can control when it sets the federal funds rate. The remaining variance of the benchmark Treasury slope factor is, by construction, accounted for by factors that are uncorrelated with the U.S. policy rate spread. A similar empirical relationship between the policy rate spread and the slope factor embedded in gilt and bund yield curves is also evident in the data, although there is some evidence in these markets of a structural break in these relationships between the slope factor and the policy rate spread sometime after the Global Financial Crisis.
8
In the interest of time, I shall not put forward a theory of what accounts for the residual variance of yield curve slope factors after accounting for the policy rate spread itself, but obvious candidates (certainly at the ELB) would include forward guidance about the path of the future policy rate as well as actual and prospective large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs.
Identifying Causation from Bond Yield Correlations
It is a truism that "correlation is not causation," and this is especially the case when trying to interpret contemporaneous correlation among asset prices generally and among bond yields in particular. Having identified one possible, parsimonious set of economic fundamentals that can help account for yield curve fluctuations in three major sovereign markets, I will now review what the empirical evidence has to say about the direction of causality reflected in observed correlations among sovereign yields.
9
I will explore two possibilities. The first possibility is that, in reality, there are no latent "global" factors whatsoever, but rather there are just U.S. factors that exogenously fluctuate and cause the global correlations in bond yields we observe in the data. There is a vast literature (Claessens, Stracca, and Warnock, 2016, provide an overview) that documents the existence of spillovers from U.S. monetary policy, especially to emerging market (EM) financial conditions, although the recent paper by Hoek, Kamin, and Yoldas (2020) suggests that the degree of those spillovers depends importantly on the source of the shock that triggers changes in Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) policy. In particular, as summarized in
figure 5.1
, they identified FOMC actions associated with "growth news" as those that were immediately followed by changes in the 10-year Treasury yield and the S&P 500 index in the same direction, whereas actions associated with "monetary news" elicited changes in yields and equity prices in opposite directions. Their key finding, illustrated in
figure 5.2
, was that FOMC policy rate surprises attributed to stronger U.S. growth generally have only moderate spillovers to EM financial conditions, whereas FOMC policy rate surprises attributed to U.S. inflationary pressures trigger more substantial spillovers to EM financial conditions. Regardless of the type of FOMC policy action, Hoek, Kamin, and Yoldas (2020) also found compelling evidence that the size of the spillover effects from the United States depends importantly on the degree of macroeconomic vulnerability of each emerging market economy (EME), with more vulnerable EMEs experiencing larger spillovers.
While I certainly believe that both fundamental and financial shocks originating in the United States propagate throughout the global financial system and likely account for a significant share of the asset price correlations across global markets that we observe in the data, the evidence—and introspection—suggests to me that causality can and often does run both ways.
10
Anecdotally, it is not difficult to recall events—plausibly exogenous to the United States—that have triggered spillovers from foreign sovereign markets to the U.S. Treasury market. A prominent example would be the surprise Brexit vote of June 23, 2016. As the news of the Brexit vote filtered through global markets that day, sovereign yields plunged in both Germany and the United States. Indeed, as is shown in
figure 6
, on that day, the 10-year Treasury yield fell almost 20 basis points, the single largest one-day decline in the eight years—and over 2,000 trading days—between January 2012 and March 2020.
11
The evidence that two-way causality is reflected in sovereign bond yield correlations is not limited to one-off geopolitical events such as Brexit. For instance, Curcuru, De Pooter, and Eckerd (2018) examined 12 years of monetary policy announcements by the FOMC and the European Central Bank (ECB)—a combined total of 266 monetary policy communications—focusing on how sovereign yields in one jurisdiction responded to monetary policy announcements made in the other. Their main findings are summarized in the two panels in
figure 7
. The left panel presents some of the evidence of the well-known, statistically significant spillovers from FOMC policy announcements to euro-area bond markets. But, as is shown in the right panel, the authors found that the spillover effect from ECB policy announcements to U.S. yields is roughly as large as that from the FOMC announcements to bund yields.
12
In another influential study using a very different identification methodology, Ehrmann, Fratzscher, and Rigobon (2011) estimated significant and approximately equal spillovers from U.S. bond market shocks to EU bond markets, and from EU bond market shocks to the U.S. Treasury market.
13
They attributed their findings to significant incipient and anticipated portfolio allocation flows across the two jurisdictions that respond elastically to expected rate-of-return differentials.
14
Concluding Remarks
To sum up, I believe that in extracting signal from noise from the Treasury yield curve, it is essential to incorporate the fact that observed yields in the United States and other major sovereign markets are determined in a global general equilibrium that is reflected, at least in part, in the global level of neutral policy rates and the state of longer-term global inflation expectations.
15
Conditional on neutral policy rates and longer-term inflation expectations, the Federal Reserve and other major central banks can be thought of as calibrating and conducting the transmission of policy—be it through rates, forward guidance, or LSAPs—primarily through the slopes of their yield curves and much less so via their levels.
16
Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward to my conversation with Raphael.
References
Bauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2020). "Interest Rates under Falling Stars,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 110 (May), pp. 1316–54.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). "
The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit
," speech delivered at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Va., March 10.
Bomfim, Antulio N. (1997). "The Equilibrium Fed Funds Rate and the Indicator Properties of Term-Structure Spreads,"
Economic Inquiry,
vol. 35 (October), pp. 830–46.
Clarida, Richard H. (2005). "Our Post-Bubble World,"
Wall Street Journal,
April 11.
——— (2019a). "
Global Shocks and the U.S. Economy
," speech delivered at "The Euro Area: Staying the Course through Uncertainties," BDF Symposium and 34th SUERF Colloquium, sponsored by Banque de France and the European Money and Finance Forum, Paris, March 28.
——— (2019b). "
Monetary Policy, Price Stability, and Equilibrium Bond Yields: Success and Consequences
," speech delivered at the High-Level Conference on Global Risk, Uncertainty, and Volatility, cosponsored by the Bank for International Settlements, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, November 12.
——— (2019c). "The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination,"
International Finance,
vol. 22 (Spring), pp. 2–19.
Clarida, Richard H., Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 115 (February), pp 147–80.
Claessens, Stijn, Livio Stracca, and Francis E. Warnock (2016). "International Dimensions of Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy,"
Journal of International Money and Finance,
vol. 67 (October), pp 1–7.
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Michiel De Pooter, and George Eckerd (2018). "
Measuring Monetary Policy Spillovers between U.S. and German Bond Yields
," International Finance Discussion Papers 1226. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
Diebold, Francis X., and Canlin Li (2006). "Forecasting the Term Structure of Government Bond Yields,"
Journal of Econometrics,
vol. 130 (February), pp. 337–64.
Diebold, Francis X., Canlin Li, and Vivian Z. Yue (2008). "Global Yield Curve Dynamics and Interactions: A Dynamic Nelson-Siegel Approach,"
Journal of Econometrics,
vol. 146 (October), pp. 351–63.
Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher, and Roberto Rigobon (2011). "Stocks, Bonds, Money Markets and Exchange Rates: Measuring International Financial Transmission,"
Journal of Applied Econometrics,
vol. 26 (September-October), pp. 948–74.
Ferreira, Thiago, and Samer Shousha (2021). "
Supply of Sovereign Safe Assets and Global Interest Rates
," International Finance Discussion Papers 1315. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
Friedman, Milton (1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 58 (March) pp. 1–17.
Gospodinov, Nikolay (2020). "Global Factors in U.S. Yield Curve," working paper, July, available at
https://sites.google.com/site/gospodinovfed
.
Greenspan, Alan (2005). "
Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan
," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 16.
Hoek, Jasper, Steve Kamin, and Emre Yoldas (2020). "
When Is Bad News Good News? U.S. Monetary Policy, Macroeconomic News, and Financial Conditions in Emerging Markets
," International Finance Discussion Papers 1269. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"
Journal of International Economics,
vol. 108 (May, S1), pp. S59–75.
Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063–1070.
Litterman, Robert B., and Josè Scheinkman (1991). "Common Factors Affecting Bond Returns,"
Journal of Fixed Income,
vol. 1 (Summer), pp. 54–61.
Obstfeld, Maurice (2020). "Global Dimensions of U.S. Monetary Policy,"
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 16 (February), pp. 73–132.
Panetta, Fabio (2021). "
Monetary Autonomy in a Globalised World
," welcome address delivered at the joint BIS, BOE, ECB, and IMF conference "Spillovers in a 'Post-Pandemic, Low-for-Long' World," Frankfurt, April 26.
Rigobon, Roberto (2003). "Identification through Heteroskedasticity,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 85 (November), pp. 777–92.
Appendix
We derive in this appendix a simple model that can be used to interpret the empirical relationship between Treasury yields, the neutral real interest rate, and the policy rate spread. Begin with the identity that the policy rate spread equals the difference between the neutral interest rate $$(r_t^\ast+\pi^\ast)$$ and the current policy rate:
$$s_t=r_t^\ast+\pi^\ast-R_{t,1}.$$
Now define the
n
-period term premium $$ \tau_{t,n} $$ through the long-term rate definition:
$$R_{t,n}=E_t\left(\frac{1}{n}\right)\ \sum_{i=0}^{n-1}{R_{t+i,1}+\ \tau_{t,n}}.$$
Consider a simple data-generating process consistent with Laubach and Williams (2003) for the neutral real interest rate
$$r_t^\ast=\ r_{t-1}^\ast+w_t$$
and a simple first-order autoregression for the policy rate spread
$$s_t=\ \rho\ s_{t-1}+e_{t,}$$
where $$ w_t $$ and $$ e_t $$ are assumed to be some unforecastable disturbances.
Then at any horizon $$ n $$ we have
$$R_{t,n}=\ r_t^\ast+\ \pi^\ast-\frac{1}{n}\left.\frac{\left(1-\rho^n\right)}{\left(1-\rho\right)}\right.s_t+\ \tau_{t,\ n}.$$
Regress $$ \tau_{t,n} $$ on the policy rate spread
$$\tau_{t,n}=\ \tau_{0,n}+\beta_ns_t+v_{t,n,}$$
where $$ \tau_{0,n} $$ and $$ \beta_n $$ are regression parameters and $$ v_{t,n} $$ is the residual, and we have (cf. figure 3)
$$R_{t,n}=\ r_t^\ast+\ \pi^\ast+\ \tau_{0,n}+\left[\beta_n-\left.\frac{1}{n}\frac{\left(1-\rho^n\right)}{\left(1-\rho\right)}\right.\right]s_t+v_{t,n}\ .\ $$
So yields at each maturity are anchored by the common neutral nominal rate $$ r_t^{\ast} + \pi^{\ast} $$ (Bauer and Rudebusch, 2020). The difference between the long rates $$ R_{t,n} $$ and the neutral interest rate $$ (r_t^{\ast} + \pi^{\ast}) $$ is a linear function of the policy rate spread with a loading that depends on the dynamics of the policy rate spread as well as the covariance between the spread and the term premium.
On May 27, 2021, this speech was updated to add a sentence to footnote 10 and add the following to the "References" section: Gospodinov, Nikolay (2020). "Global Factors in U.S. Yield Curve," working paper, July, available at
https://sites.google.com/site/gospodinovfed
.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I am grateful to Antulio Bomfim for assistance in drafting these remarks, to Canlin Li for contributing the empirical work, and to Hannah Firestone for preparing the figures.
Return to text
2. For instance, Clarida (2019b) discusses the role of falling neutral real rates and longer-term inflation expectations worldwide in the decline in global sovereign bond yields.
Return to text
3. See Ferreira and Shousha (2021) for a rigorous econometric study of the fundamental determinants of real interest rates in global general equilibrium.
Return to text
4. Diebold, Li, and Yue (2008) extended the single-country model developed by Diebold and Li (2006) to a multicountry framework that allows for both global and country-specific factors to affect domestic yield curves. In these remarks, for ease of exposition, I define the global level factor as the simple average of the Diebold-Li country level factors (renormalized as discussed in the notes to figure 1).
Return to text
5. Recent work by Bauer and Rudebusch (2020) highlights the role of movements in neutral real interest rates in the dynamics of the yield curve.
Return to text
6. Interestingly, it was the success of credible inflation targeting, in addition to financial globalization, that has put central banks in the "slope" business. In a world in which inflation expectations are not well anchored, monetary policy can have a major effect on the level of interest rates by shifting, for better or worse, longer-term inflation expectations, as was the case in the United States from the 1960s through the early 1990s (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, 2000).
Return to text
7. See Bomfim (1997) for an early exploration of the "policy rate spread" as a factor embedded in the Treasury yield curve as well as an early effort to obtain an estimate of $$r\ast\ $$ consistent with medium-term macroeconomic equilibrium. See also the appendix for a simple model linking the neutral nominal interest rate, the yield curve, the policy rate spread, and the term premium.
Return to text
8. For example, over the subsample 1999:Q1–2014:Q1, a regression of the DL slope factor embedded in the gilt (bund) yield curve on the U.K. (euro area) policy rate spread yields an
R
2
of 0.83 (0.61) with a coefficient on the policy rate spread of 0.91 (0.96), results that are comparable with the estimates for the Treasury curve discussed earlier. However, in the remaining subsample 2014:Q2 to 2019:Q4, the slope factor in these two countries is much flatter than predicted by the empirical relationship with the policy rate spread that holds in the earlier subsample.
Return to text
9. I think of $$r\ast\ $$ and the policy rate spread as mapping a potentially large set of macroeconomic fundamentals into two scalars and thus enabling dimension reduction compatible with a factor model structure. For example, the Ferreira and Sousha (2021) specification for $$r\ast\ $$ includes six explanatory variables, one of which is a trade-weighted index of global productivity and demographic trends. Likewise, one can always write the policy rate spread as $$r\ast\ +\ \pi\ast\ -\ \{{r\ast\ +\ \pi\ast\ +\ 1.5(\pi\ -\ \pi\ast)\ +\ 0.5(gap)\ +\ dev}\ \} =\ 1.5(\pi\ -\ \pi\ast)\ -\ 0.5(gap)-\ dev$$, where $$dev$$ is the deviation from a Taylor rule with a time-varying intercept equal to $$r\ast\ +\ \pi\ast\ $$.
Return to text
10. For example, Ferreira and Sousha (2021) attribute 85 basis points of the decline in U.S. neutral real interest rates since 2000 to global spillovers. Moreover, in their model, foreign central bank purchases of U.S. Treasury securities are a significant contributor to fluctuations in the supply of safe assets, which in turn empirically account for much of the variation in global real interest rates in their model. The notion of two-way causality was also examined empirically by Gospodinov (2020), who added a global factor to an otherwise standard affine term structure model of the U.S. Treasury curve.
Return to text
11. Also note from figure 6 that in the weeks before and after the Brexit vote, the 10-year Treasury yield and the dollar–pound exchange rate were rising and falling together as the market assessed the likelihood of a Brexit vote (before) and the implications of a Brexit vote (after).
Return to text
12. The finding of two-way causality suggests that major central banks (not just the Federal Reserve) still retain a fair amount of "monetary autonomy," as discussed recently by Panetta (2021).
Return to text
13. Ehrmann, Fratzscher, and Rigobon (2011) also examined potential spillovers between the United States and the euro area in the money and equity markets, finding that, particularly in the latter, spillovers from the euro area to the United States were very small, whereas those from the United States to the euro area were quite sizable. They attributed this asymmetry to the central role that U.S. equity markets play in world equity markets. Ehrmann, Fratzscher, and Rigobon (2011) used Rigobon's (2003) identification-through-heteroskedasticity methodology to estimate a structural model where various asset prices are determined simultaneously in the United States and the euro area.
Return to text
14. The evidence of two-way causality is also consistent with the U.S. economy's increasing integration with the rest of the world, which has made it more exposed to foreign shocks (Clarida, 2019a).
Return to text
15. Of course, there are very likely other fundamentals—such as equilibrium term premiums required to hold long-duration sovereign bonds and, in many countries, default and illiquidity premiums required to hold riskier sovereign debt—that are embedded in yield curve level and slope factors in addition to neutral policy rates and longer-term inflation expectations.
Return to text
16. The focus of these remarks has been on sovereign bond markets and monetary policy, but monetary policy is, of course, also transmitted through the foreign exchange market. See Clarida (2019c) for a global model of monetary policy, exchange rates, and neutral real interest rates.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 68
==================================================
May 12, 2021
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the "NABE International Symposium: A Vision of the Economy Post COVID," Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the National Association for Business Economics International Symposium: A Vision of the Economy Post COVID.
1
So much has happened since we last met in Washington in February 2020, but I am grateful that technology is allowing us to gather once again, if only virtually. I look forward, as always, to my conversation with Ellen Zentner, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, Federal Reserve monetary policy, and our new monetary policy framework.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
In February 2020, none of us could have imagined that in a few short weeks the COVID-19 pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it would deliver the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. Gross domestic product (GDP) collapsed by more than 30 percent at an annual rate in the second quarter of 2020; more than 22 million jobs were lost, wiping out a decade of employment gains; the unemployment rate rose from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent in February to almost 15 percent in April; and inflation plummeted in response to a collapse in aggregate demand that dwarfed the contraction in aggregate supply.
But with the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that the economy has proven to be much more resilient than many forecast or feared one year ago. With timely support from monetary and fiscal policy—unprecedented in both scale and scope—and the rapid development and deployment of several effective vaccines, the economy stabilized and began a robust recovery in the second half of 2020 that both we and outside forecasters expect to pick up steam this year. So far, the economic activity data we have received this year is consistent with this outlook. For example, GDP rose by an impressive 6.4 percent in the first quarter, with real final sales to private domestic purchasers up an eye-popping 10.6 percent. Household spending on goods is rising robustly, and spending on services is also picking up as contact-intensive sectors begin to reopen and recover. Business and residential investment have more than fully recovered from the 2020 collapse and are operating above pre-pandemic levels.
However, after looking at the details of Friday's disappointing employment report, the near-term outlook for the labor market appears to be more uncertain than the outlook for economic activity. Employment remains 8.2 million below its pre-pandemic peak, and the true unemployment rate adjusted for participation is closer to 8.9 percent than to 6.1 percent. At the recent pace of payroll gains—roughly 500,000 per month over the past three months—it would take until August 2022 to restore employment to its pre-pandemic level. But what this necessary rebalancing of labor supply and demand means for wage and price dynamics will depend importantly on the pace of recovery in labor force participation as well as the extent to which there are post-pandemic mismatches between labor demand and supply in specific sectors of the economy and how long any such imbalances persist.
Readings on inflation on a year-over-year basis have recently increased and are likely to rise somewhat further before moderating later this year. Over the next few months, 12-month measures of inflation are expected to move above our 2 percent longer-run goal, largely reflecting, I believe, transitory factors such as a run of year-over-year comparisons with depressed service-sector prices recorded last spring as well as the emergence of some supply bottlenecks that may limit how quickly production can rebound in certain sectors. However, under my baseline outlook, these one-time increases in prices are likely to have only transitory effects on underlying inflation, and I expect inflation to return to—or perhaps run somewhat above—our 2 percent longer-run goal in 2022 and 2023. This outcome would be entirely consistent with the new framework the Federal Reserve unanimously adopted in August 2020 and began to implement at our September 2020 Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting.
2
Recent FOMC Decisions and the New Monetary Policy Framework
At FOMC meetings convened since the new framework was announced last August, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate and asset purchases to bring it in line with our new framework. As announced in the September 2020 FOMC statement and reiterated in the following statements—including the most recent one—with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal.
3
We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved. We also expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent, and until inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time.
In addition, in our December 2020 FOMC statement, the Committee combined our forward guidance for the federal funds rate with enhanced, outcome-based guidance about our asset purchases. We indicated that we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and our holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until
substantial further progress,
measured relative to the December 2020 announcement, has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
In our new framework, we acknowledge that policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "
shortfalls
[emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations."
4
This language means that, going forward, a low unemployment rate, in and of itself, will not be sufficient to trigger a tightening of monetary policy absent any evidence from other indicators that inflation is at risk of moving above mandate-consistent levels. With regard to our price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent in a world in which an effective-lower-bound constraint is, in downturns, binding on the federal funds rate.
5
To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at the 2 percent level consistent with price stability, it will conduct policy to achieve inflation outcomes that keep long-run inflation expectations anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal. As Chair Powell indicated in his Jackson Hole remarks, we think of our new framework as an evolution from "flexible inflation targeting" to a "flexible form of average inflation targeting."
6
While this new framework represents a robust evolution in our monetary policy strategy, this strategy is in service to the dual-mandate goals of monetary policy assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress—maximum employment and price stability—that remain unchanged.
7
Concluding Remarks
Notwithstanding the recent flow of encouraging macroeconomic data, the economy remains a long way from our goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. Our guidance for interest rates and asset purchases ties the path of the federal funds rate and the size of the balance sheet to our employment and inflation goals. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy for as long as it takes until the job is well and truly done.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. The 2020 Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
.
Return to text
3. The statements issued after the September 2020 and subsequent FOMC meetings are available, along with other postmeeting statements, on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
4. The most recent version of the 2012 statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_201901.pdf
.
Return to text
5. The Fed staff's index of common inflation expectations—which is now updated quarterly on the Board's website—is a relevant indicator that this goal is being met. See Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2020), "
Index of Common Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2); and Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2021), "
Research Data Series: Index of Common Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 5).
Return to text
6. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "
New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review
," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27.
Return to text
7. See Richard H. Clarida (2020), "
The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution
," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31; and Richard H. Clarida (2020), "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences
," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.
Return to text


Discurso 69
==================================================
May 03, 2021
Community Development
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the "2021 Just Economy Conference" sponsored by the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be with you today.
Together, over the past year, we have been making our way through a very difficult time. We are not out of the woods yet, but I am glad to say that we are now making real progress. While some countries are still suffering terribly in the grip of COVID-19, the economic outlook here in the United States has clearly brightened. Vaccination levels are rising. Fiscal and monetary policy are providing strong support. The economy is reopening, bringing stronger economic activity and job creation.
That is the high-level perspective—let's call it the 30,000 foot view—and from that vantage point, we see improvement. But we should also take a look at what is happening at street level. Lives and livelihoods have been affected in ways that vary from person to person, family to family, and community to community. The economic downturn has not fallen evenly on all Americans, and those least able to bear the burden have been the hardest hit.
The pain is all the greater in light of the gains we had seen in the years prior to the pandemic. COVID swept in as the United States was experiencing the longest expansion on record. Unemployment was at 50-year lows, and inflation remained under control. Wages were moving up, particularly for the lowest-paid workers. Long-standing racial disparities in unemployment were narrowing, and many who had struggled for years were finding jobs. It was not until the later years of that expansion that its benefits had started to reach those on the margins. During our
Fed Listens
events, we met with people around the country and heard repeatedly about the life-changing gains of the strong labor market, particularly at the lower end of the income spectrum. Just a few months later, those stories changed to ones of job losses, overextended support services, and businesses built over generations closing their doors for good.
While the recovery is gathering strength, it has been slower for those in lower-paid jobs: Almost 20 percent of workers who were in the lowest earnings quartile in February of 2020 were not employed a year later, compared to 6 percent for workers in the highest quartile.
1
The Fed's latest Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking—or SHED report—which will be published later this month, will show that, for prime-age adults without a bachelor's degree, 20 percent saw layoffs in 2020 versus 12 percent for college-educated workers. And more than 20 percent of Black and Hispanic prime-age workers were laid off compared to 14 percent of white workers over the same period.
Small businesses have also faced immense difficulties. Fed research found that 80 percent of those surveyed reported a decline in revenue, with two-thirds of those businesses experiencing losses of at least 25 percent.
2
A recent Federal Reserve special report looked specifically at the impact on businesses owned by people of color, who reported greater challenges. For example, 67 percent of both Asian- and Black-owned firms and 63 percent of Hispanic-owned firms had to reduce their operations compared to 54 percent for their white counterparts.
3
Our upcoming SHED report notes that 22 percent of parents were either not working or working less because of disruptions to childcare or in-person schooling. Black and Hispanic mothers—36 percent and 30 percent, respectively—were disproportionately affected. In a similar vein, labor force participation declined around 4 percentage points for Black and Hispanic women compared to 1.6 percentage points for white women and about 2 percentage points for men overall.
4
The Fed is focused on these long-standing disparities because they weigh on the productive capacity of our economy. We will only reach our full potential when everyone can contribute to, and share in, the benefits of prosperity.
Achieving broadly shared prosperity will take action from across society, from fiscal and other government policy to private-sector initiatives to the work everyone here does. The Fed can contribute as well. Using our monetary policy tools, the Fed promotes maximum employment and price stability—two foundations of a strong, stable economy that can improve economic outcomes for all Americans. We view maximum employment as a broad and inclusive goal. Those who have historically been left behind stand the best chance of prospering in a strong economy with plentiful job opportunities. Our recent history highlights both the benefits of a strong economy and the severe costs of a weak one.
Supervisory tools also have a role to play. As part of our policy responsibilities, the Board of Governors enforces both the Fair Housing Act and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, the federal fair lending laws that prohibit discrimination in lending. Violations of the fair lending laws, along with other illegal credit practices, are taken into account during bank evaluations under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). We see our robust supervisory approach as critical to addressing racial discrimination, which can limit consumers' ability to improve their economic circumstances, including through access to homeownership and education.
The Fed's community development function plays a role as well, studying what works, convening stakeholders on both the national and District level, and helping financial institutions find opportunities to invest and expand credit opportunities in low- and moderate-income communities.
The economic landscape has changed, and efforts to provide access and credit to communities must change with it. Last year, the Fed issued a proposal for a strengthened, modernized CRA framework, with the objective of building broad support among both external stakeholders and participating agencies. Our goal is to strengthen the core purpose of meeting the credit needs of low- and moderate-income communities. We especially appreciated NCRC's feedback on the proposal.
We will continue to do our part, and we appreciate the ways our work and that of NCRC members have intersected. Last April, for instance, the Fed expanded the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility in order to broaden its reach to include some nondepository lenders. That included CDFI (community development financial institution) loan funds, which many of the people here represent. Your work provided small businesses with invaluable technical assistance to help them weather the downturn, and you have helped them get the funds they need to support their businesses.
NCRC member groups have contributed in so many ways. You helped workers who lost their jobs get retrained. You supported working parents. You helped homeowners struggling with payments and connected renters to federal assistance programs. You brought more people into the banking system, helped strengthen financial literacy and capabilities, and worked to address digital divides in areas of need—particularly in rural communities—at a time when connectivity is essential.
I would like to close by saying thank you. You have been working hard through this crisis, and an enormous amount of work still lies ahead. But what you do is essential. You provide an invaluable service: You make people's lives better. There is no higher calling.
Thank you.
1. The data pertain to Current Population Survey respondents who were in both the February 2020 and 2021 outgoing rotation groups. Earnings are weekly and were compared with all members of the outgoing rotation group in February 2020.
Return to text
2. See the Federal Reserve Banks'
Small Business Credit Survey: 2021 Report on Employer Firms
(PDF)
fielded in September–October 2020.
Return to text
3. See the FRBs'
Small Business Credit Survey
in note 2 as well as
Small Business Credit Survey: 2021 Report on Firms Owned by People of Color
(PDF)
released on April 15, 2021.
Return to text
4. Data comparisons are for the period between February 2020 and March 2021.
Return to text


Discurso 70
==================================================
April 14, 2021
The Federal Reserve's New Framework and Outcome-Based Forward Guidance
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At "SOMC: The Federal Reserve’s New Policy Framework" a forum sponsored by the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee, New York, New York (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
On August 27, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) unanimously approved a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, and, at its September and December FOMC meetings, the Committee made material changes to its forward guidance to bring it into line with this new policy framework.
1
Before I discuss the new framework and the policy implications that flow from it, I will first review some important changes in the U.S. economy that motivated the Committee to assess ways we could refine our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and sustain our goals in the economy in which we operate today and for the foreseeable future.
2
Shifting Stars and the End of "Copacetic Coincidence"
Perhaps the most significant change in our understanding of the economy since the Federal Reserve formally adopted inflation targeting in 2012 has been the substantial decline in estimates of the neutral real interest rate, r*, that, over the longer run, is consistent with our maximum-employment and price-stability mandates. Whereas in January 2012 the median FOMC participant projected a longer-run r* of 2.25 percent and a neutral nominal policy rate of 4.25 percent, as of March 2021, the median FOMC participant projected a longer-run r* equal to just 0.5 percent, which implies a neutral setting for the federal funds rate of 2.5 percent.
3
Moreover, as is well appreciated, the decline in neutral policy rates since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) is a global phenomenon that is widely expected by forecasters and financial markets to persist for years to come (Clarida, 2019).
The substantial decline in the neutral policy rate since 2012 has critical implications for monetary policy because it leaves the FOMC with less conventional policy space to cut rates to offset adverse shocks to aggregate demand. This development, in turn, makes it more likely that recessions will impart elevated risks of more persistent downward pressure on inflation and inflation expectations as well as upward pressure on unemployment that the Federal Reserve's monetary policy should—in design and implementation—seek to offset throughout the business cycle and not just in downturns themselves.
With regard to inflation expectations, there is broad agreement that achieving price stability on a sustainable basis requires that long-run inflation expectations be well anchored at the rate of inflation consistent with the price-stability goal. The pre-GFC academic literature (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, 1999; Woodford, 2003) derived the important result that a credible inflation-targeting monetary policy strategy that is not constrained by the effective lower bound (ELB) can deliver, under either rational expectations or linear least-squares learning (Bullard and Mitra, 2002), inflation expectations that themselves are well anchored at the inflation target. In other words, absent a binding ELB constraint, a policy that targets actual inflation in these models delivers long-run inflation expectations well anchored at the target "for free." And, indeed, in the 15 years before December 2008, when the federal funds rate first hit the ELB—a period when, de facto, if not de jure the Federal Reserve conducted a monetary policy that was interpreted to be targeting an inflation rate of 2 percent (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, 2000)—personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation averaged very close to 2 percent (see
figure 1
).
But this "copacetic coincidence" no longer holds in a world of low r* in which adverse aggregate demand shocks drive the economy in downturns to the ELB. In this case, economic analysis indicates that flexible inflation-targeting monetary policy cannot be relied on to deliver inflation expectations that are anchored at the target but instead will tend to deliver inflation expectations that, in each business cycle, become anchored at a level below the target (Mishkin, 2016). This finding is the crucial insight in my colleague John Williams's research with Thomas Mertens (2019) and in the research of Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019). This downward bias in inflation expectations under inflation targeting in an ELB world can in turn reduce already scarce policy space—because nominal interest rates reflect both real rates and expected inflation—and it can open up the risk of the downward spiral in both actual and expected inflation that has been observed in some other major economies.
Two other, related developments that have also become more evident than they appeared in 2012 are that price inflation seems empirically to be less responsive to resource slack, and that estimates of resource slack based on historically estimated price Phillips curve relationships are less reliable and subject to more material revision than was once commonly believed. For example, in the face of declining unemployment rates that did not result in excessive cost-push pressure to price inflation, the median of the Committee's projections of u*—the rate of unemployment consistent in the longer run with the 2 percent inflation objective—has been repeatedly revised lower, from 5.5 percent in January 2012 to 4 percent as of the March 2021 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP). In the past several years of the previous expansion, declines in the unemployment rate occurred in tandem with a notable and, to me, welcome increase in real wages that was accompanied by an increase in labor's share of national income, but not a surge in price inflation to a pace inconsistent with our price-stability mandate and well-anchored inflation expectations. Indeed, this pattern of mid-cycle declines in unemployment coincident with noninflationary increases in real wages and labor's share has been evident in the U.S. data since the 1990s (Clarida, 2016; Heise, Karahan, and Sahin, 2020; Feroli, Silver, and Edgerton, 2021).
The New Framework and Price Stability
I will now discuss the implications of the new framework for the Federal Reserve's price-stability mandate before turning to its implications for the maximum-employment mandate. Five features of the new framework and fall 2020 FOMC statements define how the Committee will seek to achieve its price-stability mandate over time.
First, the Committee expects to delay liftoff from the ELB until PCE inflation has risen to 2 percent and other complementary conditions, consistent with achieving this goal on a sustained basis, have also been met.
4
Second, with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time in the service of keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal.
5
Third, the Committee expects that appropriate monetary policy will remain accommodative for some time after the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met.
6
Fourth, policy will aim over time to return inflation to its longer-run goal, which remains 2 percent, but not below, once the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met.
7
Fifth, inflation that averages 2 percent over time represents an ex ante aspiration of the FOMC but not a time inconsistent ex post commitment.
8
As I highlighted in speeches at the Brookings Institution in November and the Hoover Institution in January, I believe that a useful way to summarize the framework defined by these five features is
temporary price-level targeting (TPLT, at the ELB) that reverts to flexible inflation targeting (once the conditions for liftoff have been reached)
.
9
Just such a framework has been analyzed by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) and Bernanke (2020), who in turn build on earlier work by Evans (2012), Reifschneider and Williams (2000), and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), among many others.
A policy that delays liftoff from the ELB until a threshold for average inflation has been reached is one element of a TPLT strategy. Starting with our September FOMC statement, we communicated that inflation reaching 2 percent is a necessary condition for liftoff from the ELB. TPLT with such a one-year memory has been studied by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019). The FOMC also indicated in these statements that the Committee expects to delay liftoff until inflation is "on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time." What "moderately" and "for some time" mean will depend on the initial conditions at liftoff (just as they do under other versions of TPLT), and the Committee's judgment on the projected duration and magnitude of the deviation from the 2 percent inflation goal will be communicated in the quarterly SEP for inflation.
Our new framework is asymmetric. That is, as in the TPLT studies cited earlier, the goal of monetary policy after lifting off from the ELB is to return inflation to its 2 percent longer-run goal, but not to push inflation below 2 percent. In the case of the Federal Reserve, we have highlighted that making sure that inflation expectations remain anchored at our 2 percent objective is just such a consideration. Speaking for myself, I follow closely the Fed staff's index of common inflation expectations (CIE)—which is now updated quarterly on the Board's website—as a relevant indicator that this goal is being met (see
figure 2
).
10
Other things being equal, my desired pace of policy normalization post liftoff to return inflation to 2 percent would be somewhat slower than otherwise if the CIE index at the time of liftoff is below the pre-ELB level.
Our framework aims ex ante for inflation to average 2 percent over time but does not make a commitment to achieve ex post inflation outcomes that average 2 percent under any and all circumstances. The same is true for the TPLT studies I cited earlier. In these studies, the only way in which average inflation enters the policy rule is through the timing of liftoff itself. Yet in stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model under TPLT with a one-year memory that reverts to flexible inflation targeting after liftoff, inflation does average very close to 2 percent (see the
table
). The model of Mertens and Williams (2019) delivers a similar outcome: Even though the policy reaction function in their model does not incorporate an ex post makeup element, it delivers a long-run (unconditional) average rate of inflation equal to target by aiming for a moderate inflation overshoot away from the ELB that is calibrated to offset the inflation shortfall caused by the ELB.
The New Framework and Maximum Employment
I turn now to the maximum-employment mandate. An important evolution in our new framework is that the Committee now defines maximum employment as the highest level of employment that does not generate sustained pressures that put the price-stability mandate at risk.
11
As a practical matter, this means to me that when the unemployment rate is elevated relative to my SEP projection of its long-run natural level, monetary policy should, as before, continue to be calibrated to eliminate such employment shortfalls, so long as doing so does not put the price-stability mandate at risk. Indeed, in our September and subsequent FOMC statements, we indicated that we expect it will be appropriate to keep the federal funds rate in the current 0 to 25 basis point target range until inflation has reached 2 percent (on an annual basis)
and
labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment. Moreover, in our December and subsequent FOMC statements, we have indicated that we expect to continue our Treasury and MBS purchases at least at the current pace until we have made substantial further progress toward achieving these dual mandate goals. In our new framework, when in a business cycle expansion labor market indicators return to a range that in the Committee's judgment is broadly consistent with its maximum-employment mandate, it will be data on inflation itself that policy will react to, but, going forward, policy will not tighten solely because the unemployment rate has fallen below any particular econometric estimate of its long-run natural level. Of note, the relevance of uncertainty about the natural rate of unemployment or the output gap for monetary policy reaction functions is a long-studied topic that remains important.
12
For example, Berge (2020) provides a discussion around the difficult task of estimating the output gap (see
figure 3
).
These considerations have an important implication for the Taylor-type policy reaction function I consult. Consistent with our new framework, the relevant policy rule benchmark I will consult once the conditions for liftoff have been met is an inertial Taylor-type rule with a coefficient of zero on the unemployment gap, a coefficient of 1.5 on the gap between core PCE inflation and the 2 percent longer-run goal, and a neutral real policy rate equal to my SEP projection of long-run r*.
13
The most recent
Monetary Policy Report
features a box on policy rules, including a Taylor-type "shortfalls" rule in which the federal funds rate reacts only to shortfalls of employment from the Committee's best judgment of its maximum level but reverts to the rule previously described once that level of employment is reached (see
figure 4
).
14
Concluding Remarks
In closing, I think of our new flexible average inflation-targeting framework as a combination of TPLT at the ELB, to which TPLT reverts once the conditions to commence policy normalization articulated in our most recent FOMC statement have been met. In this sense, our new framework indeed represents an
evolution, not a revolution,
from the flexible inflation-targeting framework in place since 2012. Thank you very much for your time and attention, and I look forward to my conversation with Peter Ireland and Athanasios Orphanides.
References
Ahn, Hie Joo, and Chad Fulton (2020). "
Index of Common Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2.
——— (2021). "
Research Data Series: Index of Common Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 5.
Berge, Travis J. (2020). "
Time-Varying Uncertainty of the Federal Reserve's Output Gap Estimate (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-012. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2020). "The New Tools of Monetary Policy,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 110 (April), pp. 943–83.
Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019). "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment,"
AEA Papers and Proceedings,
vol. 109 (May), pp. 421–26.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021).
Monetary Policy Report
(PDF)
.
Washington: Board of Governors, February.
Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra (2002). "Learning about Monetary Policy Rules,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 49 (September), pp. 1105–29.
Clarida, Richard H. (2016). "Good News for the Fed,"
International Economy,
Spring, pp. 44–45 and 75–76.
——— (2019). "The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination,"
International Finance,
vol. 22 (Spring), pp. 2–19.
——— (2020a). "
The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution
," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31.
——— (2020b). "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences
," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"
Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661–707.
——— (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 115 (February), pp. 147–80.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "
The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
no. 1, pp. 139–233.
Evans, Charles L. (2012). "Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment: Developing a State-Contingent Price-Level Target,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
,
vol. 44 (February, S1), pp. 147–55.
Fuentes-Albero, Cristina, and John M. Roberts (2021). "
Inflation Thresholds and Policy-Rule Inertia: Some Simulation Results
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 12.
Heise, Sebastian, Fatih Karahan, and Ayşegül Şahin (2020). "
The Missing Inflation Puzzle: The Role of the Wage-Price Pass-Through
," NBER Working Paper Series 27663. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August.
Ireland, Peter N. (2004). "Technology Shocks in the New Keynesian Model,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 86 (November), pp. 923–36.
Feroli, Michael, Daniel Silver, and Jesse Edgerton (2021). "US: The Inflation Outlook—Thinking Outside the Triangle," J.P. Morgan Economic Research Note. New York: JPMorgan Chase, March.
Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams (2019). "
Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates
," Staff Report 887. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May (revised August 2019).
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2016). "2% Forever? Rethinking the Inflation Target," in
Central Banking in Times of Change: A Compilation of Speeches Delivered in the OeNB's 200th Anniversary Year.
Vienna: Oesterreichische Nationalbank, pp. 92–101.
Orphanides, Athanasios, and Simon van Norden (2002). "The Unreliability of Output-Gap Estimates in Real Time,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 84 (November), pp. 569–83.
Orphanides, Athanasios, Richard D. Porter, David Reifschneider, Robert Tetlow, and Frederico Finan (2000). "Errors in the Measurement of the Output Gap and the Design of Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Economics and Business,
vol. 52 (January–April), pp. 117–41.
Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2005). "The Decline of Activist Stabilization Policy: Natural Rate Misperceptions, Learning, and Expectations,"
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
vol. 29 (November), pp. 1927–50.
Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66.
Smets, Frank R. (2002). "Output Gap Uncertainty: Does It Matter for the Taylor Rule?"
Empirical Economics,
vol. 27 (February), pp. 113–29.
Woodford, Michael (2003).
Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Table 1. Stochastic Simulation Result of FRB/US Model under Model-Consistent Expectations
ELB frequency (percent)
Mean duration of ELB (quarters)
Mean output gap
Mean inflation rate
RMSD of output gap
RMSD of inflation rate
Loss
1. Taylor
38.3
10.9
-1.1
1.2
3.5
2.2
17.2
2. Taylor (inertial)
33.6
20.7
-1.4
1.0
3.9
2.4
20.7
3. Flexible price-level target
32.6
8.5
-0.4
2.0
3.6
1.5
15.2
4. Flexible price-level target (inertial)
24.6
13.8
-0.6
2.0
4.4
1.5
21.8
5. Flexible temporary price-level target
17.6
12.9
0.3
2.4
3.4
1.6
14.5
6. Temporary price-level target
16.3
12.5
0.0
2.3
3.1
1.7
12.6
7. Temporary price-level target (3-year memory)
15.6
11.2
0.3
2.4
2.7
1.6
9.6
8. Temporary price-level target (1-year memory)
15.1
9.4
0.2
2.3
2.5
1.5
8.5
9. Reifschneider-Williams
28.1
10.1
0.2
2.1
2.4
1.6
8.0
10. Kiley-Roberts change rule
37.0
16.9
-0.1
2.1
1.9
1.4
5.7
Results are based on 500 simulations of 100 quarters each. $$ Loss={\frac{1}{N}}{\frac{1}{K}}{\Sigma_{j=1}^{K}}{\Sigma_{t=1}^{N}}{\left [ \left ( \pi _{t,j}-\pi^* \right )^{2} + \widehat{\gamma}_{t,j}^{2} \right ]}$$ for $$t$$ , $$j$$ period-simulations. FRB/US is the Federal Reserve's principal simulation model; ELB is effective lower bound; RMSD is root mean square deviation.
Source: Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019); authors' calculations.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or FOMC participants. I would like to thank Burcu Duygan-Bump and Chiara Scotti for assistance in preparing these remarks, and Hannah Firestone for help with figures and tables.
The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
. The statements of the September and December FOMC meetings are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
2. For a discussion of the elements that motivated the launch of the review, see Clarida (2020a, 2020b).
Return to text
3. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections, released following the conclusion of the March 2021 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
4. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates the inflation objective: "The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate" (paragraph 4). The FOMC statements starting with September 2020 indicate the conditions for liftoff: "The Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4). The statements are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
5. The FOMC statements starting with September 2020 read: "With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent" (paragraph 4). A similar sentence appears in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
Return to text
6. The FOMC statements starting with September 2020 read: "The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved" (paragraph 4).
Return to text
7. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates the inflation objective (see note 3).
Return to text
8. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy says: "In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4).
Return to text
9. See Clarida (2020b).
Return to text
10. See Ahn and Fulton (2020) for a discussion of the CIE index and Ahn and Fulton (2021) for a link to the regular update.
Return to text
11. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates this concept with the following: "The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee's policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments" (paragraph 3).
Return to text
12. The findings of Orphanides and van Norden (2002)—that output gap uncertainty in real time is enormous—remain true today. Moreover, as shown by several studies, including Orphanides and others (2000) and Smets (2002), "gap" uncertainty is relevant for the formulation of simple policy rules that feedback on endogenous macro outcomes (for, say, inflation and unemployment) rather than on "primitive" shocks (such as to productivity or demand). In fact, in the former case, certainty equivalence will in general not hold. Indeed, Orphanides and others (2000) and Smets (2002) show that if monetary policy is implemented with a Taylor-type rule, as output gap uncertainty increases, the optimal Taylor rule coefficient on the output gap is reduced and, if it is large enough, can be driven to zero. Orphanides and Williams (2005) make a case for monetary policy that responds less to imprecise movements in unemployment gaps and more to actual inflation in an estimated model with agents who learn over time. Finally, even if, counterfactually, gap variables were observed without error, the reduced-form theoretical relationship between slack and price inflation will in general depend on the cyclical properties of markups and labor's share, as is shown, for example, in the DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) model of Ireland (2004). And as previously discussed, at least over the past 25 years in the United States, mid-cycle increases in productivity-adjusted wages that occur in tandem with falling unemployment—the wage Phillips curve relationship—have not been passed through to faster consumer price inflation but have empirically been absorbed in lower markups.
Return to text
13. Such a reference rule is similar to the forward-looking Taylor-type rule for optimal monetary policy derived in Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999).
Return to text
14. See the box "Monetary Policy Rules and Shortfalls from Maximum Employment" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021). Note that under the FOMC's outcome-based guidance in place since September 2020, a necessary condition for liftoff from the ELB is that it judges that "shortfalls" from maximum employment have been eliminated. See Fuentes-Albero and Roberts (2021) for simulations of the FRB/US model with a shortfalls policy rule and an inflation threshold.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 71
==================================================
March 25, 2021
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the 2021 Institute of International Finance Washington Policy Summit, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the 2021 Institute of International Finance (IIF) Washington Policy Summit.
1
I regret that we are not doing this session in person, but I do hope next time we will be gathering together in Washington. I look forward, as always, to a conversation with my good friend and one-time colleague Tim Adams, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, Federal Reserve monetary policy, and our new monetary policy framework.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
In the second quarter of last year, the COVID-19 pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. Gross domestic product (GDP) collapsed at a roughly 31.5 percent annual rate in the second quarter of 2020, more than 22 million jobs were lost in March and April, and the unemployment rate rose from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent in February to almost 15 percent in April. Since then, economic activity has rebounded, and it is clear that the economy has proven to be much more resilient than many forecast or feared one year ago. GDP grew by almost 8 percent at an annual rate in the second half of last year, and private forecasters project that GDP will grow roughly 6 percent—and possibly 7 percent—this year. As shown in the latest Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' projections for 2021 GDP growth is 6.5 percent.
2
If these projections are realized, GDP will grow at the fastest four-quarter pace since 1984. And, as this is a virtual meeting of the IIF, I would be remiss if I did not highlight that if these projections for U.S. economic activity are realized, rising U.S. imports will serve as an important source of external demand to the rest of the world this year and beyond.
As with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have recently improved. Employment rose by 379,000 in February, as the leisure and hospitality sector recouped about two-thirds of the jobs that were lost in December and January. Nonetheless, employment is still 9.5 million below its pre-pandemic level for the economy as a whole. The unemployment rate remains elevated at 6.2 percent in February, and once one factors in the decline in the labor force since the onset of the pandemic and the misclassification of some workers on temporary layoff as employed, the true unemployment rate is closer to 10 percent.
It is worth highlighting that in the baseline projections of the FOMC presented in the latest SEP released last week, my colleagues and I substantially revised up our outlook for the economy, projecting a relatively rapid return to levels of employment and inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate as compared with the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis. In particular, the median FOMC participant now projects the unemployment rate to reach 4.5 percent at the end of this year and 3.5 percent by the end of 2023.
With regards to inflation, the median inflation projection of FOMC participants is 2.4 percent this year and declines to 2 percent next year before moving back up to 2.1 percent in 2023. Over the next few months, 12-month measures of inflation are expected to move temporarily above our 2 percent longer-run goal, owing to a run of year-over-year comparisons with depressed service-sector prices recorded in the spring of 2020 and supply bottlenecks limiting how quickly production can respond in the near term. However, I expect most of this increase to be transitory and for inflation to return to—or perhaps run somewhat above—our 2 percent longer-run goal in 2022 and 2023. This outcome would be entirely consistent with the new framework we adopted in August 2020 and began to implement at our September 2020 FOMC meeting.
3
In our new framework, we aim for inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. This means that following periods when inflation has been running below 2 percent—as has been the case for most of the past decade—monetary policy will aim for inflation to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. And this brings me to the next topic.
Recent FOMC Decisions and the New Monetary Policy Framework
At our most recent FOMC meetings, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate and asset purchases, and that also provided unprecedented information about our policy reaction function. As announced in the September statement and reiterated in the following statements, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal.
4
We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved. We also expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent, and until inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time.
In addition, in our December FOMC statement, the Committee combined our forward guidance for the federal funds rate with enhanced, outcome-based guidance about our asset purchases. We indicated that we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and our holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until
substantial further progress
has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
The changes to the policy statement that we made over the past few FOMC meetings bring our policy guidance in line with the new framework outlined in the revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that the Committee approved last August. In our new framework, we acknowledge that policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "
shortfalls
[emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations."
5
This language means that going forward, a low unemployment rate, in and of itself, will not be sufficient to trigger a tightening of monetary policy absent any evidence from other indicators that inflation is at risk of moving above mandate-consistent levels. With regard to our price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent in a world in which an effective-lower-bound constraint is, in downturns, binding on the federal funds rate. To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at the 2 percent level consistent with price stability, it will conduct policy to achieve inflation outcomes that keep long-run inflation expectations anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal. As Chair Powell indicated in his Jackson Hole remarks, we think of our new framework as an evolution from "flexible inflation targeting" to "flexible average inflation targeting."
6
While this new framework represents a robust evolution in our monetary policy strategy, this strategy is in service to the dual-mandate goals of monetary policy assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress—maximum employment and price stability—that remain unchanged.
7
Concluding Remarks
While our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so as the recovery progresses, it will take some time for economic activity and employment to return to levels that prevailed at the business cycle peak reached last February. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy until the job is well and truly done to help ensure that the economic recovery will be as robust and rapid as possible.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. The most recent SEP is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
3. The statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
.
Return to text
4. The statements issued after the September and subsequent FOMC meetings are available, along with other postmeeting statements, on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
5. The most recent version of the 2012 statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_201901.pdf
.
Return to text
6. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "
New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review
," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27.
Return to text
7. See Richard H. Clarida (2020), "
The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution
," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31
;
and Richard H. Clarida (2020), "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences
," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.
Return to text


Discurso 72
==================================================
March 18, 2021
Closing Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At "Pushing the Frontiers of Payments: Towards Faster, Cheaper, More Transparent and More Inclusive Cross Border Payments," a conference hosted by the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, Basel, Switzerland (via prerecorded video)
Share
Watch Live
I would like to thank Sir Jon Cunliffe and the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) for inviting me to close out the first day of this conference on pushing the frontiers of payments.
Last year, the Group of Twenty (G-20) asked the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to coordinate the development of a roadmap on how the global community could enhance cross-border payments. It has long been acknowledged that the existing system, while safe and dependable, suffers from frictions, including processes that make it difficult to comply with anti-money-laundering and countering-terrorist-financing requirements, difficulty in managing payments across time zones, and, in certain areas, a reliance on outdated technology. Moreover, these frictions contribute to higher costs for cross-border transactions.
As with many aspects of life these days, the COVID-19 pandemic has shined a light on the less efficient areas of our current payment system and accelerated the desire for improvement and digitalization. Even before the pandemic, advancements in the private sector served as a catalyst to get the attention of consumers and to prompt more engagement by the public sector.
The goal of the FSB roadmap is simple—to create an ecosystem for cross-border payments that is faster, cheaper, more transparent, and more inclusive. A year into the process, I am encouraged that we are making meaningful progress. The stage 3 report released in October laid out a practical set of steps for moving ahead on the 19 building blocks that will bring about an improved system.
1
Indeed, the themes discussed in the four sessions of the conference today correspond well to approaches described in the building blocks. The title of the first panel sets up a choice between "improving existing rails or laying new tracks." As the roadmap makes clear, one of the keys to moving forward will be doing both—improving the existing system where we can while also evaluating the potential of and the best uses for emerging technologies. As an example, the Federal Reserve is working to improve the current system through the introduction of instant or fast payments via the FedNow Service.
2
The service will be designed to maintain uninterrupted processing—24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year—with security features that will ensure payment integrity and data security. The target launch date is sometime in 2023.
*
The Federal Reserve is also doing its part to examine the role of new technologies. Experiments with central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) are being conducted at the Board of Governors, as well as complementary efforts by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in collaboration with researchers at MIT. In addition, a recent report from the Bank for International Settlements and a group of seven central banks, which includes the Fed, assessed the feasibility of CBDCs in helping central banks deliver their public policy objectives.
3
Relevant to today's topic, one of the three key principles highlighted in the report is that a CBDC needs to coexist with cash and other types of money in a flexible and innovative payment system.
Improvements in the global payments system will come not just from the public sector, but from the private sector as well. As today's second panel, "Of Lions and Unicorns," described, the private sector has the experience and expertise to develop consumer-facing infrastructure that improves and simplifies how the public engages with the financial system. Digitalization of financial services, combined with an improved consumer experience, can help increase financial inclusion, particularly in countries or areas with a large unbanked population.
And the last two panels of the day, "Addressing Legal Barriers to Cross-Border Payments" and "Harmonised Data to Oil the Cross-Border Payments Machinery," highlight that improving the system must be a collaborative effort. By definition, cross-border payments involve multiple jurisdictions. So it will only be through countries working together, via all of the international forums—the Group of Seven, the G-20, the CPMI, the FSB, and others—that solutions will be possible.
And, finally, it is only by engaging all stakeholders—policymakers, private-sector participants, and academia—as this conference is doing, that we will achieve the improved payments ecosystem we are striving toward.
The COVID crisis has brought into even sharper focus the need to address the limitations of our current arrangements for cross-border payments. And as this conference amply demonstrates, despite the challenges of this last year, we still have been able to make important progress. I again thank the CPMI and Jon Cunliffe for their leadership and look forward to working together as we improve these payments for businesses and individuals alike.
1. See Financial Stability Board (2020),
Enhancing Cross-Border Payments: Stage 3 Roadmap
(PDF)
(Basel, Switzerland: FSB, October).
Return to text
2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Federal Reserve Announces Details of New 24x7x365 Interbank Settlement Service with Clearing Functionality to Support Instant Payments in the United States
," press release, August 6.
Return to text
3. See Bank for International Settlements (2020), "
Central Banks and BIS Publish First Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) Report Laying Out Key Requirements
," press release, October 9.
Return to text
* This sentence was updated after publication: the phrase "sometime in late 2023 or 2024" was updated to "sometime in 2023".
Return to text


Discurso 73
==================================================
February 24, 2021
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Vice Chair Clarida delivered identical remarks to the American Chamber of Commerce in Australia's "Live from America" webinar series on February 24, 2021.
It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today.
1
I look forward to our conversation, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, the Federal Reserve's monetary policy, and our new monetary policy framework.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
In the second quarter of last year, the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression, but economic activity rebounded sharply in the third quarter, supported by a robust and unprecedented fiscal and monetary policy response. More recently, the pace of recovery has moderated in part because of a winter resurgence in COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations.
A number of macroeconomic data releases have been weaker than expected in recent months. Spending on services has continued to remain well below pre-pandemic levels, particularly in contact-intensive sectors, including travel, leisure, and hospitality. The pace of improvement in the labor market has slowed notably in recent months. Although more than half of the 22 million jobs that were lost last spring have been regained, the unemployment rate remained elevated at 6.3 percent in January, and once one factors in the decline in the labor force since the onset of the pandemic and misclassification, the true unemployment rate is closer to 10 percent. Core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation is running at just 1.5 percent, and, for those sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, price increases remain subdued.
Of course, we have also received some encouraging data. Retail sales stepped up considerably in January, retracing the decline late last year. The housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. Business investment and manufacturing production have also rebounded robustly. And while the economy might not continue to grow at the once-in-a-century 33 percent annualized rate of growth reported in the third quarter of 2020, it is clear that the economy has turned out to be more resilient in adapting to the virus, and more responsive to monetary and fiscal policy support, than many predicted. Indeed, it is worth highlighting that in the baseline projections of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) presented in the latest Summary of Economic Projections, released last December, most of my colleagues and I revised up our outlooks for the economy over the medium term, projecting a relatively rapid return to levels of employment and inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate as compared with the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).
2
In particular, the median FOMC participant projected in December that by the end of 2023—a little less than three years from now—the unemployment rate will have fallen below 4 percent, and PCE inflation will have returned to 2 percent. Following the GFC, it took more than eight years for employment and inflation to return to similar mandate-consistent levels.
While the winter surge in new COVID cases and the spread of new variants of the virus are cause for concern as well as a source of downside risk to the very near-term outlook, the welcome news on the development of several effective vaccines and the passage by the Congress in late December of a package of fiscal relief measures indicate to me that the prospects for the economy in 2021 and beyond have brightened and the downside risk to the outlook has diminished.
Recent FOMC Decisions and the New Monetary Policy Framework
At our most recent FOMC meetings, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate and asset purchases, and that also provided unprecedented information about our policy reaction function. As announced in the September statement and reiterated in the following statements, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal.
3
We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved. We also expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent, and until inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time.
In addition, in the December statement, we combined our forward guidance for the federal funds rate with enhanced, outcome-based guidance about our asset purchases. We indicated that we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and our holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until
substantial further progress
has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
The changes to the policy statement that we made over the past few FOMC meetings bring our policy guidance in line with the new framework outlined in the revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that the Committee approved last August.
4
In our new framework, we acknowledge that policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "
shortfalls
[emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations." This language means that going forward, a low unemployment rate, in and of itself, will not be sufficient to trigger a tightening of monetary policy absent any evidence from other indicators that inflation is at risk of moving above mandate-consistent levels. With regard to our price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent in a world in which an effective-lower-bound constraint is, in downturns, binding on the federal funds rate. To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at the 2 percent level consistent with price stability, it "seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time," and—in the same sentence—that therefore "following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." As Chair Powell indicated in his Jackson Hole remarks, we think of our new framework as an evolution from "flexible inflation targeting" to "flexible average inflation targeting."
5
While this new framework represents a robust evolution in our monetary policy strategy, this strategy is in service to the dual-mandate goals of monetary policy assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress—maximum employment and price stability—which remain unchanged.
6
Concluding Remarks
While our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so as the recovery progresses, it will take some time for economic activity and employment to return to levels that prevailed at the business cycle peak reached last February. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help ensure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust and rapid as possible.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
3. The statements issued following the September and subsequent FOMC meetings are available, along with other postmeeting statements, on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
4. The statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
.
Return to text
5. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "
New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review
," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27.
Return to text
6. See Richard H. Clarida (2020), "
The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution
," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31; and Richard H. Clarida (2020), "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences
," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.
Return to text


Discurso 74
==================================================
February 10, 2021
Getting Back to a Strong Labor Market
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Economic Club of New York (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Today I will discuss the state of our labor market, from the recent past to the present and then over the longer term. A strong labor market that is sustained for an extended period can deliver substantial economic and social benefits, including higher employment and income levels, improved and expanded job opportunities, narrower economic disparities, and healing of the entrenched damage inflicted by past recessions on individuals' economic and personal well-being. At present, we are a long way from such a labor market. Fully realizing the benefits of a strong labor market will take continued support from both near-term policy and longer-run investments so that all those seeking jobs have the skills and opportunities that will enable them to contribute to, and share in, the benefits of prosperity.
The Labor Market of a Year Ago
We need only look to February of last year to see how beneficial a strong labor market can be. The overall unemployment rate was 3.5 percent, the lowest level in a half-century. The unemployment rate for African Americans had also reached historical lows (
figure 1
). Prime-age labor force participation was the highest in over a decade, and a high proportion of households saw jobs as "plentiful."
1
Overall wage growth was moderate, but wages were rising more rapidly for earners on the lower end of the scale. These encouraging statistics were reaffirmed and given voice by those we met and conferred with, including the community, labor, and business leaders; retirees; students; and others we met with during the 14
Fed Listens
events we conducted in 2019.
2
Many of these gains had emerged only in the later years of the expansion. The labor force participation rate, for example, had been steadily declining from 2008 to 2015 even as the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis unfolded. In fact, in 2015, prime-age labor force participation—which I focus on because it is not significantly affected by the aging of the population—reached its lowest level in 30 years even as the unemployment rate declined to a relatively low 5 percent. Also concerning was that much of the decline in participation up to that point had been concentrated in the population without a college degree (
figure 2
). At the time, many forecasters worried that globalization and technological change might have permanently reduced job opportunities for these individuals, and that, as a result, there might be limited scope for participation to recover.
Fortunately, the participation rate after 2015 consistently outperformed expectations, and by the beginning of 2020, the prime-age participation rate had fully reversed its decline from the 2008-to-2015 period. Moreover, gains in participation were concentrated among people without a college degree. Given that U.S. labor force participation has lagged relative to other advanced economy nations, this progress was especially welcome (
figure 3
).
3
As I mentioned, we also saw faster wage growth for low earners once the labor market had strengthened sufficiently. Nearly six years into the recovery, wage growth for the lowest earning quartile had been persistently modest and well below the pace enjoyed by other workers. At the tipping point of 2015, however, as the labor market continued to strengthen, the trend reversed, with wage growth for the lowest quartile consistently and significantly exceeding that of other workers (
figure 4
).
At the end of 2015, the Black unemployment rate was still quite elevated, at 9 percent, despite the relatively low overall unemployment rate. But that disparity too began to shrink; as the expansion continued beyond 2015, Black unemployment reached a historic low of 5.2 percent, and the gap between Black and white unemployment rates was the narrowest since 1972, when data on unemployment by race started to be collected. Black unemployment has tended to rise more than overall unemployment in recessions but also to fall more quickly in expansions.
4
Over the course of a long expansion, these persistent disparities can decline significantly, but, without policies to address their underlying causes, they may increase again when the economy ultimately turns down.
These late-breaking improvements in the labor market did not result in unwanted upward pressures on inflation, as might have been expected; in fact, inflation did not even rise to 2 percent on a sustained basis. There was every reason to expect that the labor market could have strengthened even further without causing a worrisome increase in inflation were it not for the onset of the pandemic.
The Labor Market Today
The state of our labor market today could hardly be more different. Despite the surprising speed of recovery early on, we are still very far from a strong labor market whose benefits are broadly shared. Employment in January of this year was nearly 10 million below its February 2020 level, a greater shortfall than the worst of the Great Recession's aftermath (
figure 5
).
After rising to 14.8 percent in April of last year, the published unemployment rate has fallen relatively swiftly, reaching 6.3 percent in January. But published unemployment rates during COVID have dramatically understated the deterioration in the labor market. Most importantly, the pandemic has led to the largest 12-month decline in labor force participation since at least 1948.
5
Fear of the virus and the disappearance of employment opportunities in the sectors most affected by it, such as restaurants, hotels, and entertainment venues, have led many to withdraw from the workforce. At the same time, virtual schooling has forced many parents to leave the work force to provide all-day care for their children. All told, nearly 5 million people say the pandemic prevented them from looking for work in January. In addition, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that many unemployed individuals have been misclassified as employed. Correcting this misclassification and counting those who have left the labor force since last February as unemployed would boost the unemployment rate to close to 10 percent in January (
figure 6
).
Unfortunately, even those grim statistics understate the decline in labor market conditions for the most economically vulnerable Americans. Aggregate employment has declined 6.5 percent since last February, but the decline in employment for workers in the top quartile of the wage distribution has been only 4 percent, while the decline for the bottom quartile has been a staggering 17 percent (
figure 7
). Moreover, employment for these workers has changed little in recent months, while employment for the higher-wage groups has continued to improve. Similarly, the unemployment rates for Blacks and Hispanics have risen significantly more than for whites since February 2020 (
figure 8
). As a result, economic disparities that were already too wide have widened further.
In the past few months, improvement in labor market conditions stalled as the rate of infections sharply increased. In particular, jobs in the leisure and hospitality sector dropped over 1/2 million in December and a further 61,000 in January. The recovery continues to depend on controlling the spread of the virus, which will require mass vaccinations in addition to continued vigilance in social distancing and mask wearing in the meantime.
Since the onset of the pandemic, we have been concerned about its longer-term effects on the labor market. Extended periods of unemployment can inflict persistent damage on lives and livelihoods while also eroding the productive capacity of the economy.
6
And we know from the previous expansion that it can take many years to reverse the damage.
At the start of the pandemic, the increase in unemployment was almost entirely due to temporary job losses.
7
Temporarily laid-off workers tend to return to work much more quickly, on average, than those whose ties to their former employers are permanently severed. But as some sectors of the economy have continued to struggle, permanent job loss has increased (
figure 9
). So too has long-term unemployment. Still, as of January, the level of permanent job loss, as a fraction of the labor force, was considerably smaller than during the Great Recession. Research shows that the Paycheck Protection Program has played an important role in limiting permanent layoffs and preserving small businesses.
8
The renewal of the program this year in the face of another surge in COVID-related job cuts is an encouraging development.
Of course, in a healthy market-based economy, perpetual churn will always render some jobs obsolete as they are replaced by new employment opportunities. Over time, workers and capital move from firm to firm and from sector to sector. It is likely that the pandemic has both increased the need for such movements and brought forward some movement that would have occurred eventually.
9
Getting Back to a Strong Labor Market
So how do we get from where we are today back to a strong labor market that benefits all Americans and that starts to heal the damage already done? And what can we do to sustain those benefits over time? Experience tells us that getting to and staying at full employment will not be easy. In the near term, policies that bring the pandemic to an end as soon as possible are paramount. In addition, workers and households who struggle to find their place in the post-pandemic economy are likely to need continued support. The same is true for many small businesses that are likely to prosper again once the pandemic is behind us.
Also important is a patiently accommodative monetary policy stance that embraces the lessons of the past—about the labor market in particular and the economy more generally. I described several of those important lessons, as well as our new policy framework, at the Jackson Hole conference last year.
10
I have already mentioned the broad-based benefits that a strong labor market can deliver and noted that many of these benefits only arose toward the end of the previous expansion. I also noted that these benefits were achieved with low inflation. Indeed, inflation has been much lower and more stable over the past three decades than in earlier times.
In addition, we have seen that the longer-run potential growth rate of the economy appears to be lower than it once was, in part because of population aging, and that the neutral rate of interest—or the rate consistent with the economy being at full employment with 2 percent inflation—is also much lower than before. A low neutral rate means that our policy rate will be constrained more often by the effective lower bound. That circumstance can lead to worse economic outcomes—particularly for the most economically vulnerable Americans.
To take these economic developments into account, we made substantial revisions to our monetary policy framework, as described in the FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
11
This revised statement shares many features with its predecessor, including our view that longer-run inflation of 2 percent is most consistent with our mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. But it also has some innovations.
The revised statement emphasizes that maximum employment is a broad and inclusive goal. This change reflects our appreciation for the benefits of a strong labor market, particularly for many in low- and moderate-income communities. Recognizing the economy's ability to sustain a robust job market without causing an unwanted increase in inflation, the statement says that our policy decisions will be informed by our "assessments of the
shortfalls
of employment from its maximum level" rather than by "
deviations
from its maximum level."
12
This means that we will not tighten monetary policy solely in response to a strong labor market. Finally, to counter the adverse economic dynamics that could ensue from declines in inflation expectations in an environment where our main policy tool is more frequently constrained, we now explicitly seek to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. This means that following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time in the service of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal.
Our January postmeeting statement on monetary policy implements this new framework.
13
In particular, we expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current accommodative target range of the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. In addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities by $80 billion and $40 billion per month, respectively, until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
The Broad Responsibility for Achieving Maximum Employment
Seventy-five years ago, in the wake of WWII, the United States faced the challenge of reemploying millions amid a major restructuring of the economy toward peacetime ends.
14
Part of Congress's response was the Employment Act of 1946, which states that "it is the continuing policy and responsibility of the federal government to use all practicable means . . . to promote maximum employment."
15
As later amended in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, this provision formed the basis of the employment side of the Fed's dual mandate. My colleagues and I are strongly committed to doing all we can to promote this employment goal.
Given the number of people who have lost their jobs and the likelihood that some will struggle to find work in the post-pandemic economy, achieving and sustaining maximum employment will require more than supportive monetary policy. It will require a society-wide commitment, with contributions from across government and the private sector. The potential benefits of investing in our nation's workforce are immense. Steady employment provides more than a regular paycheck. It also bestows a sense of purpose, improves mental health, increases lifespans, and benefits workers and their families.
16
I am confident that with our collective efforts across the government and the private sector, our nation will make sustained progress toward our national goal of maximum employment.
1. Data from the Conference Board's "Jobs Are Plentiful" series (February 2020). For more on the Conference Board, see
https://www.conference-board.org
.
Return to text
2. Another
Fed Listens
event was held in 2020 to discuss the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. For a summary of all of the
Fed Listens
events, see the report
Fed Listens: Perspectives from the Public,
available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/fedlistens-report-20200612.pdf
.
Return to text
3. For data comparing labor force participation rates across countries, see Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2021), "
Labour Force Participation Rate
" (indicator), OECD Data.
Return to text
4. For a description of labor market outcomes by race and ethnicity over the business cycle, see Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019), "
Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?
" in James H. Stock and Janice Eberly, eds.,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
(Washington: Brookings Institution Press, Spring), pp. 333–75; and Tomaz Cajner, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (2017), "
Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).
Return to text
5. Published monthly data on labor force participation begin in 1948.
Return to text
6. For research on the adverse consequences of permanent job loss, see Steven J. Davis and Till von Wachter (2011), "
Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss
," in David H. Romer and Justin Wolfers, eds.,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
(Washington: Brookings Institution Press, Fall), pp. 1–75; Kenneth A. Couch and Dana W. Placzek (2010), "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers Revisited,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 100 (March), pp. 572–89; and Louis S. Jacobson, Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan (1993), "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 83 (September), pp. 685–709.
Return to text
7. The Bureau of Labor Statistics defines a job loss as temporary if the affected worker has been given a date to return to work or expects to be recalled to their former job within six months.
Return to text
8. For research on the effect of the Paycheck Protection Program on employment, see David Autor, David Cho, Leland D. Crane, Mita Goldar, Byron Lutz, Joshua Montes, William B. Peterman, David Ratner, Daniel Villar, and Ahu Yildirmaz (2020), "
An Evaluation of the Paycheck Protection Program Using Administrative Payroll Microdata (PDF)
," preliminary paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, July; João Granja, Christos Makridis, Constantine Yannelis, and Eric Zwick (2020), "
Did the Paycheck Protection Program Hit the Target? (PDF)
" NBER Working Paper Series 27095 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May (revised November 2020)); and R. Glenn Hubbard and Michael R. Strain (2020), "
Has the Paycheck Protection Program Succeeded? (PDF)
" NBER Working Paper Series 28032 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October).
Return to text
9. For a description of the reallocation of resources induced by the COVID-19 shock, see Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis (2020), "
COVID-19 Is Also a Reallocation Shock (PDF)
," NBER Working Paper Series 27137 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May).
Return to text
10. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "
New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review
," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27.
Return to text
11. The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, revised in August 2020 and reaffirmed in January, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf
.
Return to text
12. Italics added for emphasis. See Powell, "New Economic Challenges," p. 11, in note 10.
Return to text
13. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2021), "
Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement
," press release, January 27.
Return to text
14. See Joseph T. Glatthaar (2018),
The American Military: A Concise History
(New York: Oxford University Press).
Return to text
15. For a discussion, see Aaron Steelman (2013), "
Employment Act of 1946
," in
Federal Reserve History
; the quotation from the act is reprinted in Steelman, paragraph 1.
Return to text
16. See, for example, Daniel Sullivan and Till von Wachter (2009), "Job Displacement and Mortality: An Analysis Using Administrative Data,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 124 (August), pp. 1265–1306; Philip Oreopoulos, Marianne Page, and Ann Huff Stevens (2008), "The Intergenerational Effects of Worker Displacement,"
Journal of Labor Economics,
vol. 26 (July), pp. 455–83; and Bruno S. Frey and Alois Stutzer (2002), "What Can Economists Learn from Happiness Research?"
Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 40 (June), pp. 402–35.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 75
==================================================
January 13, 2021
The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the "The Road Ahead for Central Banks," a seminar sponsored by  the Hoover Economic Policy Working Group, Hoover Institution, Stanford, California (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
On August 27, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) unanimously approved a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which represents a robust evolution of its monetary policy framework.
1
At its September and December FOMC meetings, the Committee made material changes to its forward guidance to bring it into line with the new policy framework.
2
Before I discuss the new framework in detail and the policy implications that flow from it, please allow me to provide some background on the reasons the Committee felt that our framework needed to evolve.
Motivation for the Review
As my FOMC colleagues and I indicated from the outset, the fact that the Federal Reserve System chose to conduct this review does not indicate that we believed we were poorly served by the framework in place since 2012.
3
Indeed, I would argue that over the past eight years, the framework served us well and supported the Federal Reserve's efforts after the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) first to achieve and then, for several years, to sustain—until cut short this spring by the COVID-19 pandemic—the operation of the economy at or close to both our statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability in what became the longest economic expansion in U.S. history. Nonetheless, both the U.S. economy—and, equally importantly, our understanding of the economy—have clearly evolved along several crucial dimensions since 2012, and we believed that in 2019 it made sense to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we might refine and rethink our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and sustain our goals as consistently and robustly as possible in the global economy in which we operate today and for the foreseeable future.
Perhaps the most significant change since 2012 in our understanding of the economy is our reassessment of the neutral real interest rate, r*, that, over the longer run, is consistent with our maximum-employment and price-stability mandates. In January 2012, the median FOMC participant projected a long-run r* of 2.25 percent, which, in tandem with the inflation goal of 2 percent, indicated a neutral setting for the federal funds rate of 4.25 percent. However, in the eight years since 2012, members of the Committee—as well as outside forecasters and financial market participants—have repeatedly marked down their estimates of longer-run r* and, thus, the neutral nominal policy rate. Indeed, as of the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) released in December, the median FOMC participant currently projects a longer-run r* equal to just 0.5 percent, consistent with a neutral setting for the federal funds rate of 2.5 percent.
4
Moreover, as is well appreciated, the decline in neutral policy rates since the GFC is a global phenomenon that is widely expected by forecasters and financial markets to persist for years to come.
The substantial decline in the neutral policy rate since 2012 has critical implications for the design, implementation, and communication of Federal Reserve monetary policy because it leaves the FOMC with less conventional policy space to cut rates to offset adverse shocks to aggregate demand. With a diminished reservoir of conventional policy space, it is much more likely than was appreciated in 2012 that, in economic downturns, the effective lower bound (ELB) will constrain the ability of the FOMC to rely solely on the federal funds rate instrument to offset adverse shocks. This development, in turn, makes it more likely that recessions will impart elevated risks of more persistent downward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on unemployment that the Federal Reserve's monetary policy should, in design and implementation, seek to offset throughout the business cycle and not just in downturns themselves.
Two other, related developments that have also become more evident than they appeared in 2012 are that price inflation seems less responsive to resource slack, and also, that estimates of resource slack based on historically estimated price Phillips curve relationships are less reliable and subject to more material revision than was once commonly believed. For example, in the face of declining unemployment rates that did not result in excessive cost-push pressure to price inflation, the median of the Committee's projections of u*—the rate of unemployment consistent in the longer run with the 2 percent inflation objective—has been repeatedly revised lower, from 5.5 percent in January 2012 to 4.1 percent as of the December 2020 SEP. Projections of u* by the Congressional Budget Office and professional forecasters show a similar decline during this same period and for the same reason. In the past several years of the previous expansion, declines in the unemployment rate occurred in tandem with a notable and, to me, welcome increase in real wages that was accompanied by an increase in labor's share of national income, but not a surge in price inflation to a pace inconsistent with our price-stability mandate and well-anchored inflation expectations. Indeed, this pattern of mid-cycle declines in unemployment coincident with noninflationary increases in real wages has been evident in the U.S. data since the 1990s.
With regard to inflation expectations, there is broad agreement among academics and policymakers that achieving price stability on a sustainable basis requires that inflation expectations be well anchored at the rate of inflation consistent with the price-stability goal. This is especially true in the world that prevails today, with flat Phillips curves in which the primary determinant of actual inflation is expected inflation. The pre-GFC academic literature derived the important result that a credible inflation-targeting monetary policy strategy that is not constrained by the ELB can deliver, under rational expectations, inflation expectations that themselves are well anchored at the inflation target. In other words, absent a binding ELB constraint, a policy that targets actual inflation in these models delivers long-run inflation expectations well anchored at the target "for free." But this "copacetic coincidence" no longer holds in a world of low r* in which adverse aggregate demand shocks are expected to drive the economy in at least some downturns to the ELB. In this case, which is obviously relevant today, economic analysis indicates that flexible inflation-targeting monetary policy cannot be relied on to deliver inflation expectations that are anchored at the target, but instead will tend to deliver inflation expectations that, in each business cycle, become anchored at a level below the target. This is the crucial insight in my colleague John Williams's research with Thomas Mertens. This downward bias in inflation expectations under inflation targeting in an ELB world can in turn reduce already scarce policy space—because nominal interest rates reflect both real rates and expected inflation—and it can open up the risk of the downward spiral in both actual and expected inflation that has been observed in some other major economies.
The New Framework and Price Stability
Six features of the new framework and fall 2020 FOMC statements define how the Committee will seek to achieve its price-stability and maximum-employment mandates over time. First, the Committee expects to delay liftoff from the ELB until PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation has risen to 2 percent and other complementary conditions, consistent with achieving this goal on a sustained basis, have also been met.
5
Second, with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time in the service of keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal.
6
Third, the Committee expects that appropriate monetary policy will remain accommodative for some time after the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met.
7
Fourth, policy will aim over time to return inflation to its longer-run goal, which remains 2 percent, but not below, once the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met.
8
Fifth, inflation that averages 2 percent over time represents an ex ante aspiration of the FOMC, but not a time-inconsistent ex post commitment.
9
As I highlighted in a speech at the Brookings Institution in November, I believe that a useful way to summarize the framework defined by these five features is
temporary price-level targeting (TPLT, at the ELB) that reverts to flexible inflation targeting (once the conditions for liftoff have been reached).
10
Just such a framework has been analyzed by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) and Bernanke (2020), who in turn build on earlier work by Evans (2012), Reifschneider and Williams (2000), and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). Each of these five elements of the new framework is consequential. I now discuss each in turn and provide some context for how I understand them to relate to the monetary economics literature on TPLT.
A policy that delays liftoff from the ELB until a threshold for average inflation has been reached is one element of a TPLT strategy. Starting with our September FOMC statement, we communicated that inflation reaching 2 percent is a necessary condition for liftoff from the ELB. This condition refers to inflation on an annual basis. TPLT with such a one-year memory has been studied by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019). The FOMC also indicated in these statements that the Committee expects to delay liftoff until inflation is "on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time." What "moderately" and "for some time" mean will depend on the initial conditions at liftoff (just as they do under other versions of TPLT), and the Committee's judgment on the projected duration and magnitude of the deviation from the 2 percent inflation goal will be communicated in the quarterly SEP for inflation.
In the TPLT studies I cited earlier, policy is assumed to revert to an inertial Taylor rule after liftoff, and therefore policy remains accommodative for some time thereafter, which depends on the degree of policy inertia in the reaction function. Our three most recent FOMC statements also call for policy to remain accommodative for some time after liftoff, and, once the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met, the SEP "dot plot" will convey the Committee's projections for the pace of liftoff as well as the ultimate destination for the policy rate.
Our new framework is asymmetric. That is, as in the previously cited TPLT studies, the goal of monetary policy after lifting off from the ELB is to return inflation to its 2 percent longer-run goal, but not to push inflation below 2 percent. In the case of the Federal Reserve, we have highlighted that making sure that inflation expectations remain anchored at our 2 percent objective is just such a consideration. Speaking for myself, I follow closely the Fed staff's index of common inflation expectations (CIE) as a relevant indicator that this goal is being met (
see the figure
).
11
Other things being equal, my desired pace of policy normalization post-liftoff to return inflation to 2 percent—as well as the projected pace of return to 2 percent inflation—would be somewhat slower than otherwise if the CIE index is, at time of liftoff, below the pre-ELB level. Another factor I will consider in calibrating the pace of policy normalization post-liftoff is the average rate of PCE inflation since the new framework was adopted in August 2020—a time, as it happened, when the federal funds rate was constrained at the ELB.
Our framework aims ex ante for inflation to average 2 percent over time, but it does not make a (time-inconsistent) commitment to achieve ex post inflation outcomes that average 2 percent under any and all circumstances. The same is true for the TPLT studies I cited earlier. In these studies, the only way in which average inflation enters the policy rule is through the timing of liftoff itself. Yet in stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model under TPLT with a one-year memory that reverts to flexible inflation targeting after liftoff, inflation does average very close to 2 percent
(see the table
). The model of Mertens and Williams (2019) delivers a similar outcome: Even though the policy reaction function in their model does not incorporate an ex post makeup element, it delivers a long-run (unconditional) average rate of inflation equal to target by aiming for a moderate inflation overshoot away from the ELB that is calibrated to offset the inflation shortfall caused by the ELB.
The New Framework and Maximum Employment
Regarding our maximum-employment mandate—a sixth element—an important evolution in our new framework is that the Committee now defines maximum employment as the highest level of employment that does not generate sustained pressures that put the price-stability mandate at risk.
12
As a practical matter, this definition means to me that when the unemployment rate is elevated relative to my SEP forecast of its long-run natural level, monetary policy should, as before, continue to be calibrated to eliminate such employment shortfalls so long as doing so does not put the price-stability mandate at risk. Indeed, in our September and subsequent FOMC statements, we indicated that we expect it will be appropriate to keep the federal funds rate in the current 0 to 25 basis point target range until inflation has reached 2 percent (on an annual basis)
and
labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment. In our new framework, when in a business cycle expansion labor market indicators return to a range that, in the Committee's judgment, is broadly consistent with its maximum-employment mandate, it will be data on inflation itself that policy will react to, but going forward, policy will not tighten solely because the unemployment rate has fallen below any particular econometric estimate of its long-run natural level. This guidance has an important implication for the Taylor-type policy reaction function I will consult. Consistent with our new framework, the relevant policy rule benchmark I will consult once the conditions for liftoff have been met is an inertial Taylor-type rule with a coefficient of zero on the unemployment gap, a coefficient of 1.5 on the gap between core PCE inflation and the 2 percent longer-run goal, and a neutral real policy rate equal to my SEP forecast of long-run r*. Such a reference rule, which becomes relevant once the conditions for policy normalization have been met, is similar to the forward-looking Taylor-type rule for optimal monetary policy derived in Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999).
Concluding Remarks
In closing, I think of our new flexible average inflation-targeting framework as a combination of TPLT at the ELB with flexible inflation targeting, to which TPLT reverts once the conditions to commence policy normalization articulated in our most recent FOMC statement have been met. In this sense, our new framework indeed represents an
evolution, not a revolution.
Thank you very much, and I now look forward—as always—to the discussion with the participants in this virtual Hoover event.
References
Ahn, Hie Joo, and Chad Fulton (2020). "
Index of Common Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2020). "The New Tools of Monetary Policy,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 110 (April), pp. 943–83.
Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019). "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment,"
AEA Papers and Proceedings,
vol. 109 (May), pp. 421–26.
Clarida, Richard H. (2020a). "
The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution
," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31.
——— (2020b). "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences
," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.
Clarida, Richard H., Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"
Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661–707.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "
The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
no. 1, pp. 139–233.
Evans, Charles L. (2012). "Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment: Developing a State-Contingent Price-Level Target,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
, vol. 44 (February, S1), pp. 147–55.
Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams (2019). "
Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates
," Staff Report 887. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May (revised August 2019).
Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66.
1. The statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
.
Return to text
2. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or FOMC participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
3. For studies and references on the elements that motivated the launch of the review, see Clarida (2020a).
Return to text
4. The most recent SEP, released following the conclusion of the December 2020 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
5. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates the inflation objective: "The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate" (paragraph 4). The FOMC statements starting with September 2020 indicate the conditions for liftoff: "The Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4). The statements are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
6. The FOMC statements starting with September 2020 read: "With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent" (paragraph 4). A similar sentence appears in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
Return to text
7. The FOMC statements starting with September 2020 read: "The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved" (paragraph 4).
Return to text
8. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates the inflation objective (see note 5).
Return to text
9. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy says: "In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4).
Return to text
10. See Clarida (2020b).
Return to text
11. See Ahn and Fulton (2020) for a discussion of the CIE index.
Return to text
12. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates this concept with the following: "The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee's policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments" (paragraph 3).
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 76
==================================================
January 08, 2021
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York (via webcast)
Share
It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the Council on Foreign Relations.
1
I regret that we are not doing this session in person, as we did last year, and I hope the next time I am back, we will be gathering together in New York City again. I look forward to my conversation with Steve Liesman and to your questions, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, Federal Reserve monetary policy, and our new monetary policy framework.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
In the second quarter of last year, the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. Economic activity rebounded robustly in the third quarter and has continued to recover in the fourth quarter from its depressed second-quarter level, though the pace of improvement has moderated. Household spending on goods, especially durable goods, has been strong and has moved above its pre-pandemic level, supported in part by federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits. In contrast, spending on services remains well below pre-pandemic levels, particularly in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. In the labor market, more than half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in March and April have been regained, as many people were able to return to work. Inflation, following large declines in the spring of 2020, picked up over the summer but has leveled out more recently; for those sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, price increases remain subdued.
While gross domestic product growth in the fourth quarter downshifted from the once-in-a-century 33 percent annualized rate of growth reported in the third quarter, it is clear that since the spring of 2020, the economy has turned out to be more resilient in adapting to the virus, and more responsive to monetary and fiscal policy support, than many predicted. Indeed, it is worth highlighting that in the baseline projections of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) summarized in the latest Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), most of my colleagues and I revised up our outlook for the economy over the medium term, projecting a relatively rapid return to levels of employment and inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate as compared with the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).
2
In particular, the median FOMC participant projects that by the end of 2023—a little less than three years from now—the unemployment rate will have fallen below 4 percent, and PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation will have returned to 2 percent. Following the GFC, it took more than eight years for employment and inflation to return to similar mandate-consistent levels.
While the recent surge in new COVID cases and hospitalizations is cause for concern and a source of downside risk to the very near-term outlook, the welcome news on the development of several effective vaccines indicates to me that the prospects for the economy in 2021 and beyond have brightened and the downside risk to the outlook has diminished. The two new SEP charts that we released for the first time following the December FOMC meeting speak to these issues by providing information on how the risks and uncertainties that surround the modal or baseline projections have evolved over time. While nearly all participants continued to judge that the level of uncertainty about the economic outlook remains elevated, fewer participants saw the balance of risks as weighted to the downside than in September. Although a little more than half of participants judged risks to be broadly balanced for economic activity, a similar number continued to see risks weighted to the downside for inflation.
The Latest FOMC Decision and the New Monetary Policy Framework
At our most recent FOMC meetings, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate and asset purchases, and that also provided unprecedented information about our policy reaction function. As announced in the September statement and reiterated in November and December, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal.
3
We expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved. We also expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent,
and
until inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time.
In addition, in the December statement, we combined our forward guidance for the federal fund rate with enhanced, outcome-based guidance about our asset purchases. We indicated that we will continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and our holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until
substantial further progress
has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
The changes to the policy statement that we made over the fall bring our policy guidance in line with the new framework outlined in the revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that the Committee approved last August.
4
In our new framework, we acknowledge that policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "
shortfalls
[emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations." This language means that going forward, a low unemployment rate, in and of itself, will not be sufficient to trigger a tightening of monetary policy absent any evidence from other indicators that inflation is at risk of moving above mandate-consistent levels. With regard to our price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent in a world in which an effective-lower-bound constraint is, in downturns, binding on the federal funds rate. To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at the 2 percent level consistent with price stability, it "seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time," and—in the same sentence—that therefore "following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." As Chair Powell indicated in his Jackson Hole remarks, we think of our new framework as an evolution from "flexible inflation targeting" to "flexible average inflation targeting."
5
While this new framework represents a robust evolution in our monetary policy strategy, this strategy is in service to the dual-mandate goals of monetary policy assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress—maximum employment and price stability—which remain unchanged.
6
Concluding Remarks
While our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so as the recovery progresses, it will take some time for economic activity and employment to return to levels that prevailed at the business cycle peak reached last February. We are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help ensure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. The most recent SEP is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
3. See the FOMC statements issued after the September, November, and December meetings, which are available (along with other postmeeting statements) on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
4. The statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
.
Return to text
5. See Jerome H. Powell (2020), "
New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy
," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27.
Return to text
6. See Richard H. Clarida (2020), "
The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution
," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington (via webcast), August 31; and Richard H. Clarida (2020), "
The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences
," speech delivered at "The Economy and Monetary Policy," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington (via webcast), November 16.
Return to text


Discurso 77
==================================================
November 16, 2020
The Federal Reserve's New Framework: Context and Consequences
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the "The Economy and Monetary Policy" event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Vice Chair Clarida delivered substantially similar remarks to an event hosted by the International Monetary Fund on November 24, 2020.
On August 27, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) unanimously approved a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that represents a robust evolution of its monetary policy framework.
1
The new framework has important implications for the way the FOMC going forward will conduct monetary policy in support of its efforts to achieve its dual-mandate goals in a world of low neutral policy rates and persistent global disinflationary pressures. At the September 16 FOMC meeting, the Committee made material changes to its forward guidance for the future path of the federal funds rate to bring the guidance into line with the new policy framework and, in so doing, provided transparent outcome-based guidance linked to the macroeconomic conditions that must prevail before the Committee expects to lift off from the effective lower bound (ELB). In my remarks today, I would like to look ahead and offer my individual perspective on the consequences of our new framework for the conduct of monetary policy over the business cycle, and I also want to provide some context that connects key elements of our new framework to the literature on optimal monetary policy subject to an ELB constraint that binds in economic downturns. Let me say at the outset that when I am not quoting directly from the consensus statement and the September FOMC statement, the views expressed are my own and do not necessarily express the views of other Federal Reserve Board members or FOMC participants.
2
The plan of my talk is as follows. I will first highlight and discuss the five elements of the new framework that define how the Committee will seek to achieve its price-stability mandate over time and how, in September, it revised its forward guidance on the federal funds rate to bring the FOMC's policy communications into line with the new framework. I will then provide my perspective on how these key elements of the new framework and the related forward guidance connect to the literature on conducting optimal monetary policy at—and after lifting off from—the ELB. I will next discuss how the Committee's conception of its maximum-employment mandate, a sixth element of the new framework, has evolved since 2012, what this evolution implies for the conduct of monetary policy, and how I plan to factor in this information as I think about the appropriate path for setting the federal funds rate once the conditions for liftoff have been met. I will conclude with a brief recap of my thesis before joining David Wessel, Seth Carpenter, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen in what I am sure will be an engaging virtual conversation.
The New Framework and Price Stability
In my remarks today, I will focus on six key elements of our new framework and the forward guidance provided by our September FOMC statement. Five of these elements define how the Committee will seek to achieve its price-stability mandate over time, while the sixth pertains to the Committee's conception of its maximum-employment mandate. Of course, the Committee's price-stability and maximum-employment mandates are generally complementary, and, indeed, this complementarity is recognized and respected in the forward-guidance language introduced in the September FOMC statement.
3
However, for ease of exposition, I will begin by focusing on the five elements of the new framework that define how the Committee will seek to achieve over time its price-stability mandate, before discussing how maximum employment is defined in the new framework and what this definition implies for the conduct and communication of monetary policy under the new framework.
Five features of the new framework and September FOMC statement define how the Committee will seek to achieve its price-stability mandate over time:
The Committee expects to delay liftoff from the ELB until PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation has risen to 2 percent on an annual basis and other complementary conditions, consistent with achieving this goal on a sustained basis and to be discussed later, are met.
4
With inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time in the service of having inflation average 2 percent over time and keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at the 2 percent longer-run goal.
5
The Committee expects that appropriate monetary policy will remain accommodative for some time after the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met.
6
Policy will aim over time to return inflation to its longer-run goal, which remains 2 percent, but not below, once the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met.
7
Inflation that averages 2 percent over time represents an ex ante aspiration of the FOMC, but not a time-inconsistent ex post commitment.
8
I believe that a useful way to summarize the framework defined by these five features is
temporary price-level targeting (TPLT, at the ELB) that reverts to flexible inflation targeting (once the conditions for liftoff have been reached).
Just such a framework has been analyzed by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) and Bernanke (2020), who in turn build on earlier work by Evans (2012) and Reifschneider and Williams (2000), among others.
9
Each of the five elements of the new framework highlighted previously is consequential. I now discuss each in turn and provide some context for how I understand them to relate to the monetary economics literature on TPLT.
First element
A policy that delays liftoff from the ELB until a threshold for average inflation has been reached is one element of a TPLT strategy. In our September FOMC statement, we communicated that, along with other complementary conditions, inflation must have risen to 2 percent before we expect to lift off from the ELB. This condition refers to inflation on an annual basis. TPLT with such a one-year memory has been studied using stochastic simulations of the Fed's FRB/US model by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019).
Second element
An alternative version of TPLT would commit the central bank to delay liftoff until inflation has averaged 2 percent over a longer period—say, three years (Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) study the case of TPLT with a three-year memory as well as the case of TPLT with a one-year memory) or perhaps an even longer period that commences when the policy rate hits the ELB itself (as in Bernanke's (2017a) original TPLT proposal). In these versions of TPLT, inflation would likely have to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time before the condition for liftoff is met. For example, if TPLT with a three-year memory were chosen and inflation in three consecutive years equaled 1.9 percent, 2 percent, and 2.1 percent, then liftoff would not occur until inflation hit 2.1 percent for one year. Note, however, that TPLT with a longer memory
does not
define ex ante the amount by which inflation must exceed 2 percent before liftoff is considered, nor does it specify for how long inflation exceeds 2 percent before liftoff is considered. For example, under TPLT with a three-year memory, if inflation instead equaled 1.8 percent, 2 percent, and 2.2 percent for three consecutive years, then liftoff ex post could not occur until inflation hit 2.2 percent for one year. But if, instead, inflation equaled 1.8 percent, 2.1 percent, and 2.1 percent, then inflation would exceed 2 percent for two years before liftoff were contemplated. In the case of the Federal Reserve, the FOMC chose a one-year memory for the inflation threshold that must be met before liftoff is considered, but it also indicated in September that the Committee expects to delay liftoff until inflation is "on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time." What "moderately" and "for some time" mean will depend on the initial conditions at liftoff (just as they do under versions of TPLT with a longer memory). Crucially, the Committee's judgment on the projected duration and magnitude of the deviation from the 2 percent inflation goal will, at the time of liftoff and every three months thereafter, be communicated in the quarterly Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) for inflation.
10
The SEP has served this purpose before. For example, in 2018, as the FOMC factored in an unexpected tailwind from a mid-cycle fiscal expansion and chose to maintain a gradual pace of normalization to return the federal funds rate to its projected neutral stance, the median participant at the September 2018 FOMC meeting projected that core PCE inflation would moderately exceed 2 percent for three years. The FOMC statement itself can, in the new regime, also be used as a platform to communicate the Committee's tolerance for deviations of inflation from the 2 percent longer-run goal, and, indeed, it has served this purpose in the past—for example, with the threshold-based guidance linked to inflation outcomes introduced in the FOMC statement in December 2012.
11
Third element
In the TPLT framework studied by Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019), policy reverts to an inertial Taylor rule after liftoff, so policy remains accommodative for some time, which depends in their formulation on the degree of policy inertia in the reaction function. Our September FOMC statement also calls for policy to remain accommodative for some time after liftoff. Once the conditions to commence policy normalization have been met, the SEP "dot plot" will convey the median participant's projections over a three-year horizon not only for inflation, but also for the pace of liftoff as well as the ultimate destination for the policy rate. I will have more to say shortly about a relevant policy rule benchmark that I believe is consistent with the new framework.
Fourth element
The new framework is asymmetric. That is, as in Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019), the goal of monetary policy after lifting off from the ELB is to return inflation to its 2 percent longer-run goal, but not to push inflation below 2 percent. In other words, after liftoff from the ELB, monetary policy reverts to simple flexible inflation targeting (Bernanke, 2017b). In the Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) study, flexible inflation targeting post-liftoff is implemented with an inertial Taylor rule that satisfies the Taylor principle (that is, the policy responds to the difference between actual inflation and the 2 percent target with a coefficient that exceeds unity). The policy is flexible in that the desired pace of return to 2 percent can reflect considerations other than the 2 percent longer-run goal for inflation that are relevant to the Committee's mandate. In the case of the Federal Reserve, we have highlighted that making sure that inflation expectations remain anchored at our 2 percent objective is just such a consideration. Speaking for myself, I follow closely the Fed staff's index of common inflation expectations (CIE) as a relevant indicator that this goal is being met.
12
Other things being equal, if at the time of liftoff the CIE index is below its pre-ELB level, then my desired pace of policy normalization post-liftoff to return inflation to 2 percent—as well as the projected pace of return to 2 percent inflation—would be somewhat slower than if the CIE index at the time of liftoff is equal to its pre-ELB level. Another factor I will consider in calibrating the pace of policy normalization post-liftoff is the average rate of PCE inflation since the new framework was adopted in August 2020—a time, as it happened, that the federal funds rate was constrained at the ELB. If average inflation since August 2020 turns out to be notably below 2 percent, then my desired pace of policy normalization post-liftoff—and the implied pace of return to 2 percent inflation—would, other things being equal, be somewhat slower than if average inflation since adoption was close to or equal to 2 percent. It is important to note, however, that the goal of the new framework is to keep inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent, and, for this reason, I myself plan to focus more on indicators of inflation expectations themselves—especially survey-based measures—than I will on the calculation of an average rate of inflation over any particular window of time.
Fifth element
Our framework aims ex ante for inflation to average 2 percent over time, but it does not make a (time-inconsistent) commitment to achieve ex post inflation outcomes that average 2 percent under any and all circumstances and constellations of shocks. The same is true for the TPLT regime studied in Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) featuring TPLT with a one-year memory. In this regime, the only way in which average inflation enters the policy rule is through the timing of liftoff itself. Yet in stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model under TPLT with a one-year memory that reverts to flexible inflation targeting after liftoff, inflation does average very close to 2 percent in the stochastic simulations reported in their paper. The model of Mertens and Williams (2019) delivers a similar outcome: Even though the policy reaction function in their model does not incorporate an ex post makeup element, it delivers a long-run (unconditional) average rate of inflation equal to target by aiming for a moderate inflation overshoot away from the ELB that is calibrated to offset the inflation shortfall caused by the ELB.
It is important to note that, as our new consensus statement emphasizes, the Federal Reserve is committed to using
all
of our available tools—not just the federal funds rate and forward guidance, but also large-scale asset purchases—to achieve our dual-mandate goals. Since our March 2 FOMC meeting, the federal funds rate has been reduced by 150 basis points to its ELB and we have increased our Treasury and mortgage-backed securities holdings by a total of $3.3 trillion; we continue to add to these holdings at a pace of $120 billion per month.* These large-scale asset purchases are providing substantial support to the economic recovery by sustaining smooth market functioning and fostering accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. At our November FOMC meeting, we discussed our asset purchases and the critical role they are playing in supporting the economic recovery. Looking ahead, we will continue to monitor developments and assess how our ongoing asset purchases can best support achieving our maximum-employment and price-stability objectives. In this regard, I note that the simulation results reported in Bernanke (2020) suggest that, in general, a monetary policy at the ELB that combines threshold forward guidance, such as I have discussed in these remarks, with
large-scale asset purchases, such as we have had in place since March, is best equipped ex ante to achieve inflation outcomes that are consistent with price stability and well-anchored inflation expectations at the 2 percent objective.
The New Framework and Maximum Employment
An important evolution in our new framework is that the Committee now defines maximum employment as the highest level of employment that does not generate sustained pressures that put the price-stability mandate at risk.
13
As a practical matter, this definition means to me that, when the unemployment rate is elevated relative to my SEP projection of its long-run level and other indicators—such as the prime-age employment-to-population and labor force participation ratios—are depressed relative to recent business cycle peaks, monetary policy should, as before, continue to be calibrated to eliminate such employment shortfalls as long as doing so does not put the price-stability mandate at risk. Indeed, in our September FOMC statement, we indicated that we expect it will be appropriate to keep the federal funds rate in the current 0 to 25 basis point target range until inflation has reached 2 percent (on an annual basis)
and
labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessment of maximum employment. In our new framework, when in a business cycle expansion labor market indicators return to a range that, in the Committee's judgment, is broadly consistent with its maximum-employment mandate, it will be data on inflation itself that policy will react to, but going forward, policy will not tighten solely because the unemployment rate has fallen below any particular econometric estimate of its long-run natural level. This guidance has an important implication for the Taylor-type policy reaction function I will consult. In particular, I will continue—as I have done since joining the Fed—to consult policy rules that respect the Taylor principle as a benchmark for calibrating the pace and destination of policy rate normalization once, after the inflation and employment thresholds have been reached, the process of policy normalization commences. Consistent with our new framework, the relevant policy rule benchmark I will consult after the conditions for liftoff have been met is an inertial Taylor-type rule with a coefficient of zero on the unemployment gap, a coefficient of 1.5 on the gap between core PCE inflation and the 2 percent longer-run goal, and a neutral real policy rate equal to my SEP projection of long-run r*. As discussed earlier, the degree of inertia in the benchmark rule I consult will depend on initial conditions at the time of liftoff, especially the reading of the staff's CIE index relative to its February 2020 level. Such a reference rule, which becomes relevant once the conditions for policy normalization have been met, is similar to the forward-looking Taylor-type rule for optimal monetary policy derived in Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999). The stability properties of Taylor-type rules in dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models have been studied by Bullard and Mitra (2002) and Galí (2008), among others, and they show that for the standard Taylor coefficient of 1.5 on the inflation gap and a coefficient of zero on the unemployment gap, the rational expectations equilibrium is unique for standard parametrizations.
One dimension along which our new framework may appear to differ from the threshold forward-guidance proposals advocated by some others is that our September FOMC guidance explicitly requires that, at the time of liftoff, in addition to inflation reaching 2 percent (on an annual basis), labor market conditions must have also reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, and I offered earlier the metrics on some of the labor market indicators I will follow to make that assessment. However, any difference between our September FOMC guidance and similar threshold guidance policies that depend only on realized inflation is, I believe, more apparent than real. The reason is that proponents of inflation-based threshold guidance typically acknowledge that liftoff following an ELB episode should be conditioned on the judgment that inflation has sustainably reached the target before liftoff is contemplated (Bernanke, 2017b), and such an assessment of sustainability in most circumstances would, I believe, be informed by an assessment of labor market conditions (Reifschneider and Wilcox, 2020). The Committee confronted just this situation in the first half of 2012, when core PCE inflation reached 2 percent at a time when the unemployment rate remained elevated at 8.2 percent, well above the top of the range of FOMC estimates of its longer-run normal level. The Committee at that time wisely, in my judgment, chose not to lift off in 2012, and I would hope—and, under our September rate guidance, expect—a future Committee would reach the same judgment under similar circumstances.
Concluding Remarks
In closing, I think of our new flexible average inflation-targeting framework as a combination of TPLT at the ELB with flexible inflation targeting, to which TPLT reverts once the conditions to commence policy normalization articulated in our September 2020 FOMC statement have been met. In this sense, our new framework indeed represents an
evolution, not a revolution.
The Committee is committed to using all available tools, including threshold-based forward guidance as well as large-scale asset purchases, to achieve the price-stability and maximum-employment goals specified in our new consensus statement. Thank you very much, and I now look forward to my virtual conversation with Annette, David, and Seth.
References
Ahn, Hie Joo, and Chad Fulton (2020). "
Index of Common Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2017a). "
Monetary Policy in a New Era (PDF)
," paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 12–13.
——— (2017b). "
Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy
,"
Ben Bernanke's Blog,
October 12.
——— (2020). "The New Tools of Monetary Policy,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 110 (April), pp. 943–83.
Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019). "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment,"
AEA Papers and Proceedings,
vol. 109 (May), pp. 421–26.
Bullard, James, and Kaushik Mitra (2002). "Learning about Monetary Policy Rules,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 49 (September), pp. 1105–29.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"
Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661–707.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "
The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
no. 1, pp. 139–233.
Evans, Charles L. (2012). "Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment: Developing a State-Contingent Price-Level Target,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
, vol. 44 (February, S1), pp. 147–55.
Galí, Jordi (2008).
Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018). "
From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams (2019). "
Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates
," Staff Report 887. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May (revised August 2019).
Reifschneider, David L., and David Wilcox (2020). "
A Program for Strengthening the Federal Reserve's Ability to Fight the Next Recession (PDF)
," Working Paper Series 20‑5. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, March.
Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66.
1. The statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
.
Return to text
2. I would like to thank Ellen Meade and Chiara Scotti for their assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
3. The September 2020 FOMC statement says: "The Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4). The statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
4. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates the inflation objective: "The Committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate" (paragraph 4). The September 2020 FOMC statement indicates the conditions for liftoff (see note 3).
Return to text
5. The September 2020 FOMC statement reads: "With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent" (paragraph 4). A similar sentence appears in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
Return to text
6. The September 2020 FOMC statement reads: "The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. With inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved" (paragraph 4).
Return to text
7. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates the inflation objective (see note 4).
Return to text
8. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy says: "In order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time" (paragraph 4).
Return to text
9. See also Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Hebden and López-Salido (2018).
Return to text
10. The most recent SEP, an addendum to the minutes of the September 2020 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
11. The guidance from the December 2012 FOMC statement was the following: "To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored" (paragraph 5). The statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
12. See Ahn and Fulton (2020) for a discussion of the CIE index.
Return to text
13. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy articulates this concept with the following: "The maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. Consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the Committee's policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. The Committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments" (paragraph 3).
Return to text
*The speech has been updated to clarify that the Committee began to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate at its March 2 meeting; the change in securities holdings has been updated accordingly.


Discurso 78
==================================================
October 19, 2020
U.S. Economic Outlook, Monetary Policy, and Initiatives to Sustain the Flow of Credit to Households and Firms
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the Unconventional Convention of the American Bankers Association, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the Unconventional Convention of the American Bankers Association.
1
I look forward to my conversation with Rob Nichols, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, Federal Reserve monetary policy, and some of the initiatives we have announced to support the flow of credit to households and firms during these challenging times.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
In the first half of this year, the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. Gross domestic product (GDP) collapsed at an almost 32 percent annual rate in the second quarter, and more than 22 million jobs were lost in March and April. This recession was by far the deepest one in postwar history, but it also may go into the record books as the briefest recession in U.S. history. The flow of macrodata received since May has been surprisingly strong, and GDP growth in the third quarter is estimated by many forecasters to have rebounded at roughly a 30 percent annual rate. This development is especially noteworthy when set in relief against the surge in new COVID-19 cases that were reported this summer in a number of U.S. states and the coincident flatlining in a number of high-frequency activity indicators that we follow to track the effect of the virus on economic activity.
Although spending on many services continues to lag, the rebound in the GDP data has been broad based across indicators of goods consumption, housing, and investment. These components of aggregate demand have benefited from robust fiscal support—including expanded unemployment benefits and the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program (PPP)—as well as low interest rates and efforts by the Federal Reserve to sustain the flow of credit to households and firms. In the labor market, about half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in the spring have been restored, and the unemployment rate has fallen since April by nearly 7 percentage points to 7.9 percent as of September.
I remind you that in the spring, many voices questioned what good rate cuts, forward guidance, asset purchases, and lending programs could do in an economy in which people do not venture out to buy cars or build houses nor do companies invest to augment their capital stock. Well, the data indicate that with rates low, credit available, and incomes supported by fiscal transfers, the answer is—at least so far—that they do build houses, buy cars, and order equipment and software. That said, the COVID-19 recession threw the economy into a very deep hole, and it will take some time, perhaps another year, for the level of GDP to fully recover to its previous 2019 peak. It will likely take even longer than that for the unemployment rate to return to a level consistent with our maximum-employment mandate. However, it is worth highlighting that the Committee's baseline projections summarized in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections foresee a relatively rapid return to mandate-consistent levels of employment and inflation as compared with the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).
2
In particular, the median Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participant projects that by the end of 2023—a little more than three years from now—the unemployment rate will have fallen to 4 percent, and PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation will have returned to 2 percent. Following the GFC, it took more than eight years for employment and inflation to return to similar mandate-consistent levels. My baseline outlook is close to these projections, but I must also acknowledge that the economic outlook is unusually uncertain, and, moreover, that the ultimate course the economy follows will depend on the course of the virus, social-distancing norms, and mitigation efforts put in place to contain it.
The September FOMC Decision
At our September FOMC meeting, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate, and that also provided unprecedented information about our policy reaction function. We indicated that, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal. We said that we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved, and also that we expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent,
and
until inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. We also stated that the Federal Reserve will, over coming months, continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses.
Banking Initiatives
In recent months, the Federal Reserve has announced several initiatives to support the efforts of our nation's banks to sustain the flow of credit to households and firms during these challenging times. Along with the other federal banking agencies, we have encouraged banks to work constructively with borrowers who have been affected by COVID-19—offering a customer a responsible loan modification can be a safe and sound banking practice and can help facilitate the economic recovery.
3
Turning to some issues of particular importance to small banks, we have provided temporary regulatory relief on the community bank leverage ratio, on regulatory reporting deadlines, and on appraisal requirements. We have also streamlined our bank examinations for small banks. These actions are providing banks with additional time and resources to adjust their operations to prioritize the financial needs of their customers and communities, and to play the vital role of lending to small businesses through the PPP.
With regard to actions taken that are relevant for larger institutions, we have adapted our stress-testing framework to better identify the potential effects of the pandemic on the capital positions of our banks. In June, we released the annual stress-test results and an additional sensitivity analysis that explored vulnerabilities of banks to the downside risks to the economy arising from the pandemic.
4
At the same time, to ensure resilience of the largest banks, we required them to resubmit their capital plans, imposed limitations on capital distributions, and recently provided new scenarios that will be used for a second round of stress tests later this year.
5
Among other actions to support financial intermediaries during the pandemic, in April, the Board issued an interim final rule that would exclude, on a temporary basis, U.S. Treasury securities and deposits at Federal Reserve Banks from large bank holding companies' supplementary leverage ratio.
6
The rule has helped ease strains in the U.S. Treasury market and continues to facilitate the significant inflow of customer deposits at banks that has occurred since the onset of the event.
Looking ahead, in September, the Board published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) that would modernize the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) by strengthening, clarifying, and tailoring CRA regulations to ensure that they reflect the current banking landscape and better meet the core purpose of the CRA, addressing inequities in credit access and ensuring an inclusive financial services industry.
7
The ANPR proposes special provisions for minority depository institutions (MDIs), women-owned financial institutions, low-income credit unions, and community development financial institutions. Because of feedback received about lack of awareness of existing MDI provisions in the CRA regulations, the Board plans to highlight all MDI special provisions and make the credit they receive more prominent and clear in revised regulation, examination guidance, and other public documentation. In addition, we also propose four specific new MDI provisions.
8
Finally, the CRA also proposes to create incentives for bank investments in geographic areas of need outside of traditional assessment areas.
Concluding Remarks
While recovery since the spring collapse in economic activity has been robust, let us not forget that the full economic recovery from the COVID-19 recession has a long way to go, with the unemployment rate still elevated at 7.9 percent as of September and inflation still running below our 2 percent longer-run objective. It will take some time to return to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the business cycle peak in February, and additional support from monetary—and likely fiscal—policy will be needed. Speaking for the Fed, I can assure you that we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help ensure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust and rapid as possible.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections, an addendum to the minutes of the September 2020 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
3. For loan modification details, see Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (2020), "
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Issues Statement on Additional Loan Accommodations Related to COVID-19
," press release, August 3.
Return to text
4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Federal Reserve Board Releases Results of Stress Tests for 2020 and Additional Sensitivity Analyses Conducted in Light of the Coronavirus Event
," press release, June 25.
Return to text
5. For second-round stress-test information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Federal Reserve Board Releases Hypothetical Scenarios for Second Round of Bank Stress Tests
," press release, September 17.
Return to text
6. For more details regarding the effect on the supplementary leverage ratio, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Temporary Exclusions of U.S. Treasury Securities and Deposits at Federal Reserve Banks from the Supplementary Leverage Ratio
," interim final rule and request for comment (Docket No. 2020-07345),
Federal Register,
vol. 85 (April 14), pp. 20578–86.
Return to text
7. For additional information on the CRA ANPR, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Federal Reserve Board Issues Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on an Approach to Modernize Regulations That Implement the Community Reinvestment Act
," press release, September 21.
Return to text
8. For additional information on the new MDI provisions, see Lael Brainard (2020), "
Modernizing and Strengthening CRA Regulations: A Conversation with Minority Depository Institutions
," speech delivered to the National Bankers Association (via webcast), Washington, October 15.
Return to text


Discurso 79
==================================================
October 14, 2020
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the 2020 Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the 2020 Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute of International Finance.
1
I regret that we are not doing this session in person, and I hope the next time Tim Adams invites me back, we will be gathering together in Washington. I look forward, as always, to my conversation with Tim, but first, please allow me to offer a few remarks on the economic outlook, Federal Reserve monetary policy, and our new monetary policy framework.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
In the first half of this year, the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) pandemic and the mitigation efforts put in place to contain it delivered the most severe blow to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression. Gross domestic product (GDP) collapsed at an almost 32 percent annual rate in the second quarter, and more than 22 million jobs were lost in March and April. This recession was by far the deepest one in postwar history, but it also may go into the record books as the briefest recession in U.S. history. The flow of macrodata received since May has been surprisingly strong, and GDP growth in the third quarter is estimated by many forecasters to have rebounded at perhaps a 25 to 30 percent annual rate. This development is especially noteworthy when set in relief against the surge in new COVID-19 cases that were reported this summer in a number of U.S. states and the coincident flatlining in a number of high-frequency activity indicators that we follow to track the effect of the virus on economic activity.
Although spending on many services continues to lag, the rebound in the GDP data has been broad based across indicators of goods consumption, housing, and investment. These components of aggregate demand have benefited from robust fiscal support—including the Paycheck Protection Program and expanded unemployment benefits—as well as low interest rates and efforts by the Federal Reserve to sustain the flow of credit to households and firms. In the labor market, about half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in the spring have been restored, and the unemployment rate has fallen since April by nearly 7 percentage points to 7.9 percent as of September.
I remind you that in the spring, many voices questioned what good rate cuts, forward guidance, asset purchases, and lending programs could do in an economy in which people do not venture out to buy cars or build houses and in which companies do not invest to augment their capital stock. Well, the data show us that with rates low, credit available, and incomes supported by fiscal transfers, the answer is—at least so far—that they do build houses, buy cars, and order equipment and software. That said, the COVID-19 recession threw the economy into a very deep hole, and it will take some time, perhaps another year, for the level of GDP to fully recover to its previous 2019 peak. It will likely take even longer than that for the unemployment rate to return to a level consistent with our maximum-employment mandate. However, it is worth highlighting that the Committee's baseline projections summarized in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections foresee a relatively rapid return to mandate-consistent levels of employment and inflation as compared with the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).
2
In particular, the median Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participant projects that by the end of 2023—a little more than three years from now—the unemployment rate will have fallen to 4 percent, and PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation will have returned to 2 percent. Following the GFC, it took more than eight years for employment and inflation to return to similar mandate-consistent levels. My baseline outlook is close to these projections, but I must also acknowledge that the economic outlook is unusually uncertain, and, moreover, that the ultimate course the economy follows will depend on the course of the virus, social-distancing norms, and mitigation efforts put in place to contain it.
The September FOMC Decision and the New Monetary Policy Framework
At our September FOMC meeting, the Committee made important changes to our policy statement that upgraded our forward guidance about the future path of the federal funds rate, and that also provided unprecedented information about our policy reaction function. We indicated that, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, our policy will aim to achieve inflation outcomes that keep inflation expectations well anchored at our 2 percent longer-run goal. We said that we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes—as well as our maximum-employment mandate—are achieved, and also that we expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment, until inflation has risen to 2 percent,
and
until inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. We also stated that the Federal Reserve will, over coming months, continue to increase our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses.
The September FOMC meeting was the first since the Committee approved in August our new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy and adopted a new policy framework.
3
The changes we made in our September FOMC statement bring our policy guidance in line with this new framework. In our new framework, we acknowledge that policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "
shortfalls
[emphasis added] of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations." This language means that going forward, a low unemployment rate, in and of itself, will not be sufficient to trigger a tightening of monetary policy absent any evidence from other indicators that inflation is at risk of moving above mandate-consistent levels. With regard to our price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent in a world in which an effective-lower-bound constraint is, in downturns, binding on the federal funds rate. To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at the 2 percent level consistent with price stability, it "seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time," and—in the same sentence—that therefore "following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." As Chair Powell indicated in his Jackson Hole remarks, we think of our new framework as an evolution from "flexible inflation targeting" to "flexible average inflation targeting."
4
While this new framework represents a robust evolution in our monetary policy strategy, this strategy is in service to the dual-mandate goals of monetary policy assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress—maximum employment and price stability—which remain unchanged.
5
Concluding Remarks
While economic recovery since the spring collapse has been robust, let us not forget that full economic recovery from the COVID-19 recession has a long way to go. Although the unemployment rate has declined sharply since April, it remains elevated as of September at 7.9 percent and would be about 3 percentage points higher if labor force participation remained at February 2020 levels. Moreover, despite a recent uptick, inflation is still running below our 2 percent longer-run objective. It will take some time to return to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the business cycle peak in February, and additional support from monetary—and likely fiscal—policy will be needed. Speaking for the Fed, I can assure you that we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help ensure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust and rapid as possible.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Chiara Scotti for her assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
2. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections, an addendum to the minutes of the September 2020 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
3. The statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetary-policy-strategy.htm
.
Return to text
4. See Jerome H. Powell (2020),
"New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review,"
speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo. (via webcast), August 27.
Return to text
5. See Richard H. Clarida (2020),
"The Federal Reserve's New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution,"
speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C. (via webcast), August 31.
Return to text


Discurso 80
==================================================
October 06, 2020
Recent Economic Developments and the Challenges Ahead
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the National Association for Business Economics Virtual Annual Meeting
Share
Watch Live
Good morning. It has been just eight months since the pandemic first gained a foothold on our shores, bringing with it the sharpest downturn on record, as well as the most forceful policy response in living memory. Although it is too early for definitive conclusions, today I will offer a current assessment of the response to the economic fallout of this historic event and discuss the path ahead.
The Pre-COVID Economy
As the coronavirus spread across the globe, the U.S. economy was in its 128th month of expansion—the longest in our recorded history—and was generally in a strong position. Moderate growth continued at a slightly above-trend pace. Labor market conditions were strong across a range of measures. The unemployment rate was running at 50-year lows. PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation was running just below our 2 percent target.
The economy did face longer-term challenges, as all economies do. Labor force participation among people in their prime working years had been trending down since the turn of the millennium, and productivity gains during the expansion were disappointing. Income and wealth disparities had been growing for several decades. As the expansion continued its long run, however, productivity started to pick up, the labor market strengthened, and the benefits of growth began to be more widely shared. In particular, improved labor market conditions during the past few years encouraged more prime-age workers to rejoin or remain in the labor force. Meanwhile, real wage gains for all workers picked up, especially for those in lower paying jobs.
Most economic forecasters expected the expansion and its benefits to continue, and with good reason. There was no economy-threatening asset bubble to pop and no unsustainable boom to bust. While nonfinancial business leverage appeared to be elevated, leverage in the household sector was moderate. The banking system was strong, with robust levels of capital and liquidity. The COVID-19 recession was unusual in that it was not triggered by a buildup of financial or economic imbalances. Instead, the pandemic shock was essentially a case of a natural disaster hitting a healthy economy.
Given the condition of the economy, in the early stages of the crisis it seemed plausible that, with a rapid, forceful, and sustained policy response, many sectors of the economy would be able to bounce back strongly once the virus was under control. That response would need to come from actions across all levels of government, from health and fiscal authorities, and from the Federal Reserve.
It also seemed likely that the sectors most affected by the pandemic—those relying on extensive in-person contact—would face a long and difficult path to recovery. These sectors and people working in them would likely need targeted and sustained policy support.
Some asked what the Fed could do to address what was essentially a medical emergency. We identified three ways that our tools could help limit the economic damage from the pandemic: providing stability and relief during the acute phase of the crisis when much of the economy was shut down; vigorously supporting the expansion when it came; and doing what we could to limit longer-run damage to the productive capacity of the economy.
The Recession and Nascent Recovery
When it became clear in late February that the disease was spreading worldwide, financial markets were roiled by a global flight to cash. By the end of the month, many important markets were faltering, raising the threat of a financial crisis that could exacerbate the economic fallout of the pandemic. Widespread economic shutdowns began in March, and in the United States, with many sectors shut down or operating well below capacity, real GDP fell 31 percent in the second quarter on an annualized basis. Employers slashed payrolls by 22 million, with those on temporary layoff rising by 17 million. Broader measures of labor market conditions, such as labor force participation and those working part time for economic reasons, showed further damage.
In response, we deployed the full range of tools at our disposal, cutting rates to their effective lower bound; conducting unprecedented quantities of asset purchases; and establishing a range of emergency lending facilities to restore market function and support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments. We also implemented targeted and temporary measures to allow banks to better support their customers.
The fiscal response was truly extraordinary. The unanimous passage of the CARES Act and three other bills passed with broad support in March and April established wide-ranging programs that are expected to provide roughly $3 trillion in economic support overall—by far the largest and most innovative fiscal response to an economic crisis since the Great Depression.
What have these policies managed to accomplish so far?
First, the substantial fiscal aid has given vital support to households. The rise in transfers supported necessary spending and contributed to a sharp increase in household saving. Goods consumption is now above its pre-pandemic level. Services consumption remains low, although it seems likely that much of this weakness is the byproduct of health concerns and social distancing, rather than reductions in income and wealth. Consumption held up well through August after the expiration of expanded unemployment insurance benefits, indicating that savings from transfer payments continue to support economic activity. A recent Fed survey showed that households in July had surprisingly upbeat views of their current financial well-being, with 77 percent of adults either "doing okay" or "living comfortably," an improvement even over the reading immediately preceding the pandemic.
1
Still, since it appears that many will undergo extended periods of unemployment, there is likely to be a need for further support.
Second, aid to firms—in particular, the Paycheck Protection Program—and the general boost to aggregate demand have so far partly forestalled an expected wave of bankruptcies and lessened permanent layoffs. Business investment appears to be on a renewed upward trajectory and new business formation similarly appears to be rebounding, pointing to some confidence in the path ahead.
Third, after briefly seizing up in March, financial markets have largely returned to normal functioning, albeit in the context of extensive ongoing policy support. Financial conditions are highly accommodative, and credit is available on reasonable terms for many—though not all—households and businesses. Interest-sensitive spending has been relatively strong, as shown in the housing and auto sectors.
Taken together, fiscal and monetary policy actions have so far supported a strong but incomplete recovery in demand and have—for now—substantially muted the normal recessionary dynamics that occur in a downturn. In a typical recession, there is a downward spiral in which layoffs lead to still lower demand, and subsequent additional layoffs. This dynamic was disrupted by the infusion of funds to households and businesses. Prompt and forceful policy actions were also likely responsible for reducing risk aversion in financial markets and business decisions more broadly.
While the combined effects of fiscal and monetary policy have aided the solid recovery of the labor market so far, there is still a long way to go. Payrolls have now recovered roughly half of the 22 million decline. After rising to 14.7 percent in April, the unemployment rate is back to 7.9 percent, clearly a significant and rapid rebound. A broader measure that better captures current labor market conditions—by adjusting for mistaken characterizations of job status, and for the decline in labor force participation since February—is running around 11 percent.
The burdens of the downturn have not been evenly shared. The initial job losses fell most heavily on lower-wage workers in service industries facing the public—job categories in which minorities and women are overrepresented. In August, employment of those in the bottom quartile of the wage distribution was still 21 percent below its February level, while it was only 4 percent lower for other workers.
2
Combined with the disproportionate effects of COVID on communities of color, and the overwhelming burden of childcare during quarantine and distance learning, which has fallen mostly on women, the pandemic is further widening divides in wealth and economic mobility.
The Road Ahead
I will now turn to the outlook. The recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected. The most recent projections by FOMC (Federal Open Market Committee) participants at our September meeting show the recovery continuing at a solid pace. The median participant saw unemployment declining to 4 percent and inflation reaching 2 percent by the end of 2023. Of course, the economy may perform better or worse than expected. The outlook remains highly uncertain, in part because it depends on controlling the spread and effects of the virus. There is a risk that the rapid initial gains from reopening may transition to a longer than expected slog back to full recovery as some segments struggle with the pandemic's continued fallout. The pace of economic improvement has moderated since the outsize gains of May and June, as is evident in employment, income, and spending data. The increase in permanent job loss, as well as recent layoffs, are also notable.
We should continue do what we can to manage downside risks to the outlook. One such risk is that COVID-19 cases might again rise to levels that more significantly limit economic activity, not to mention the tragic effects on lives and well-being. Managing this risk as the expansion continues will require following medical experts' guidance, including using masks and social-distancing measures.
A second risk is that a prolonged slowing in the pace of improvement over time could trigger typical recessionary dynamics, as weakness feeds on weakness. A long period of unnecessarily slow progress could continue to exacerbate existing disparities in our economy. That would be tragic, especially in light of our country's progress on these issues in the years leading up to the pandemic.
The expansion is still far from complete. At this early stage, I would argue that the risks of policy intervention are still asymmetric. Too little support would lead to a weak recovery, creating unnecessary hardship for households and businesses. Over time, household insolvencies and business bankruptcies would rise, harming the productive capacity of the economy, and holding back wage growth. By contrast, the risks of overdoing it seem, for now, to be smaller. Even if policy actions ultimately prove to be greater than needed, they will not go to waste. The recovery will be stronger and move faster if monetary policy and fiscal policy continue to work side by side to provide support to the economy until it is clearly out of the woods.
Given this audience, I would be remiss were I not to mention our review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications, which concluded recently with our adoption of a flexible average inflation-targeting regime. My colleagues and I have discussed this new framework in detail in recent remarks. Today I will just note that the underlying structure of the economy changes over time, and that the FOMC's framework for conducting monetary policy must keep pace. The recent changes to our consensus statement reflect our evolving understanding of several important developments. There has been a decline in estimates of the potential or longer-run growth rate of the economy and in the general level of interest rates, presenting challenges for the ability of monetary policy to respond to a downturn. On a more positive note, we have seen that the economy can sustain historically high levels of employment, bringing significant societal benefits and without causing a troubling rise in inflation. The new consensus statement acknowledges these developments and makes appropriate changes in our monetary policy framework to position the FOMC to best achieve its statutory goals.
The forward rate guidance adopted at our September meeting reflects our new consensus statement. The new guidance says that, with inflation running persistently below our longer-run 2 percent goal, the Committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. The Committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of policy until these outcomes are achieved. The Committee also left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at 0 to 1/4 percent, and it expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels that are consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time.
We expect that the new framework and guidance will support our efforts in pursuit of a strong economic recovery.
Thank you. I look forward to our discussion.
1. See
Update on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households: July 2020 Results,
or SHED, issued in September 2020 and available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2019-report-economic-well-being-us-households-update-202009.pdf
.
Return to text
2. Using data from ADP, the Board staff estimate that at the end of April, 41 percent of the workers in the bottom quartile (based on their previous wage) had lost their jobs, compared with only 13 percent for the other three quartiles. See the Board's June 2020
Monetary Policy Report,
available at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/20200612_mprfullreport.pdf
, for more details.
Return to text


Discurso 81
==================================================
August 31, 2020
The Federal Reserve’s New Monetary Policy Framework: A Robust Evolution
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
View On-Demand
Last week, the Federal Reserve reached an important milestone in its ongoing review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices with the unanimous approval and release of a new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
1
In my remarks today, I will discuss our new framework and highlight some important policy implications that flow from the revised statement and our new strategy.
2
I believe that this new statement and strategy represent a critical and robust evolution of our framework that will best equip the Federal Reserve to achieve our dual-mandate objectives on a sustained basis in the world in which we conduct policy today and for the foreseeable future.
I will divide my remarks into four parts. First, I will discuss the factors that motivated the Federal Reserve in November 2018 to announce it would undertake in 2019 the first-ever public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Second, I will discuss the review process itself, with particular focus on the economic analysis and public input the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) drew on as it contemplated, over the past 18 months, potential changes to its policy framework. Third, I will briefly summarize the flexible inflation-targeting strategy that has been guiding U.S. monetary policy since 2012 in the context of some important changes in the economic landscape that have become evident since 2012. Fourth, I will discuss the major findings of the review as codified in our new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy and highlight some important policy implications that flow from them. Finally, I will offer some brief concluding remarks before joining in conversation with my good friend Adam Posen, which, as always, I very much look forward to.
Motivation for the Review
As my FOMC colleagues and I indicated from the outset, the fact that the Federal Reserve System chose to conduct this review does not indicate that we believed we have been poorly served by the framework in place since 2012. Indeed, I would argue that over the past eight years, the framework served us well and supported the Federal Reserve's efforts after the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) first to achieve and then, for several years, to sustain—until cut short this spring by the COVID-19 pandemic—the operation of the economy at or close to both our statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability in what became the longest economic expansion in U.S. history. Nonetheless, both the U.S. economy—and, equally importantly, our understanding of the economy—have clearly evolved along several crucial dimensions since 2012, and we believed that in 2019 it made sense to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we might refine and rethink our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and sustain our goals as consistently and robustly as possible in the global economy in which we operate today and for the foreseeable future.
3
Perhaps the most significant change since 2012 in our understanding of the economy is our reassessment of the neutral real interest rate, r*, that, over the longer run, is consistent with our maximum-employment and price-stability mandates. In January 2012, the median FOMC participant projected a long-run r* of 2.25 percent, which, in tandem with the inflation goal of 2 percent, indicated a neutral setting for the federal funds rate of 4.25 percent. However, in the eight years since 2012, members of the Committee—as well as outside forecasters and financial market participants—have repeatedly marked down their estimates of longer-run r* and, thus, the neutral nominal policy rate.
4
Indeed, as of the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) released in June, the median FOMC participant currently projects a longer-run r* equal to just 0.5 percent, which implies a neutral setting for the federal funds rate of 2.5 percent. Moreover, as is well appreciated, the decline in neutral policy rates since the GFC is a global phenomenon that is widely expected by forecasters and financial markets to persist for years to come.
5
The substantial decline in the neutral policy rate since 2012 has critical implications for the design, implementation, and communication of Federal Reserve monetary policy because it leaves the FOMC with less conventional policy space to cut rates to offset adverse shocks to aggregate demand. With a diminished reservoir of conventional policy space, it is much more likely than was appreciated in 2012 that, in economic downturns, the effective lower bound (ELB) will constrain the ability of the FOMC to rely solely on the federal funds rate instrument to offset adverse shocks.
6
This development, in turn, makes it more likely that recessions will impart elevated risks of more persistent downward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on unemployment that the Federal Reserve's monetary policy should, in design and implementation, seek to offset throughout the business cycle and not just in downturns themselves.
7
Two other, related developments that have also become more evident than they appeared in 2012 are that price inflation seems less responsive to resource slack, and also, that estimates of resource slack based on historically estimated price Phillips curve relationships are less reliable and subject to more material revision than was once commonly believed.
8
For example, in the face of declining unemployment rates that did not result in excessive cost-push pressure to price inflation, the median of the Committee's projections of u*—the rate of unemployment consistent in the longer run with the 2 percent inflation objective—has been repeatedly revised lower, from 5.5 percent in January 2012 to 4.1 percent as of the June 2020 SEP.
9
Projections of u* by the Congressional Budget Office and professional forecasters show a similar decline during this same period and for the same reason.
10
In the past several years of the previous expansion, declines in the unemployment rate occurred in tandem with a notable and, to me, welcome increase in real wages that was accompanied by an increase in labor's share of national income, but not a surge in price inflation to a pace inconsistent with our price-stability mandate and well-anchored inflation expectations. Indeed, this pattern of mid-cycle declines in unemployment coincident with noninflationary increases in real wages has been evident in the U.S. data since the 1990s.
11
With regard to inflation expectations, there is broad agreement among academics and policymakers that achieving price stability on a sustainable basis requires that inflation expectations be well anchored at the rate of inflation consistent with the price-stability goal. This is especially true in the world that prevails today, with flat Phillips curves in which the primary determinant of actual inflation is expected inflation.
12
The pre-GFC academic literature derived the important result that a credible inflation-targeting monetary policy strategy that is not constrained by the ELB can deliver, under rational expectations, inflation expectations that themselves are well anchored at the inflation target.
13
In other words, absent a binding ELB constraint, a policy that targets actual inflation in these models delivers long-run inflation expectations well anchored at the target "for free." But this "copacetic coincidence" no longer holds in a world of low r* in which adverse aggregate demand shocks are expected to drive the economy in at least some downturns to the ELB. In this case, which is obviously relevant today, economic analysis indicates that flexible inflation-targeting monetary policy cannot be relied on to deliver inflation expectations that are anchored at the target, but instead will tend to deliver inflation expectations that, in each business cycle, become anchored at a level below the target.
14
This is the crucial insight in my colleague John Williams' research with Thomas Mertens. Indeed John's research over the past 20 years on r* estimation and monetary policy design at the ELB have been enormously influential, not only in the profession but also at Fed and certainly in my own thinking about how our framework should evolve. This downward bias in inflation expectations under inflation targeting in an ELB world can in turn reduce already scarce policy space—because nominal interest rates reflect both real rates and expected inflation—and it can open up the risk of the downward spiral in both actual and expected inflation that has been observed in some other major economies.
Inflation expectations are, of course, not directly observed and must be imperfectly inferred from surveys, financial market data, and econometric models. Each of these sources contains noise as well as signal, and they can and sometimes do give contradictory readings. But, at minimum, the failure of actual PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation—core or headline—over the past eight years to reach the 2 percent goal on a sustained basis cannot have contributed favorably to keeping inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent. Indeed, my reading of the evidence is that the various measures of inflation expectations I follow reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal.
15
The Review Process
With this brief overview of important changes in the economic landscape since 2012, I would now like to discuss the review process itself. In November 2018, the Federal Reserve announced that in 2019 the System would undertake a wide-ranging, public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. This initiative would be the first-ever
public
review of monetary policy strategy ever undertaken by the Fed. From the outset, it was conceived that the review would build on three pillars: a series of livestreamed
Fed Listens
events hosted by each of the 12 Reserve Banks and the Board, a flagship research conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and a series of 13 rigorous briefings for the Committee by System staff at a succession of five consecutive FOMC meetings commencing in July 2019 and running through January 2020.
The
Fed Listens
series built on a long-standing practice at the Reserve Banks and the Board of hosting outreach events that included a wide range of community groups, but, by focusing on a common format in which representatives of these groups were encouraged to tell their stories about our policies' effect on their communities and daily lives, it became a potent vehicle for us to better connect with the people our policies are meant to benefit. Although many people across the System were involved in making
Fed Listens
the success it was, I would be more than remiss if I did not single out Ellen Meade for her indefatigable contributions and attention to detail and organization that were essential to pulling the whole thing off. A report on the
Fed Listens
series is available on the Board's web site.
16
The second pillar of our review, a research conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, brought together some of the world's leading academic experts in monetary economics to present bespoke papers on a range of topics central to the review. These papers and the robust discussion at the conference that they stimulated were an important input to the review process. The proceedings of the Chicago conference are available as a special January 2020 issue of the
International Journal of Central Banking.
17
The third important pillar of the review is a collection of 13 memos prepared by System staff and discussed by the Committee at a number of FOMC meetings over the past 18 months. These memos were commissioned by a System steering committee that included Jeff Fuhrer, Marc Giannoni, and David Altig, with extensive input from Trevor Reeve. Thomas Laubach chaired the steering committee, and I must note that we simply would not be here today discussing this significant evolution of our framework without Thomas and the insights, inspiration, and good judgment that he brought to the project and the review process. A collection of the staff memos prepared for the review is now available on the Board's website.
18
A New Economic Landscape Compels a Framework ReThink
As I mentioned earlier, the Committee devoted five consecutive FOMC meetings between July 2019 and January 2020 to presentations by the staff and Committee discussions of memos touching on various aspects of the framework review, and it held a lengthy discussion at the July 2020 FOMC meeting about the new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
19
While it is fair to say that these Committee discussions revealed among the 17 participants a healthy range of views about and priorities for refining our framework and strategy, some common themes did emerge, and these provided the foundation for the revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy that the Committee discussed in July, approved last week, and released on Thursday, August 27.
Broadly, we agreed that the economic landscape has changed in important ways since 2012 and that, as a result, the existing statement and the monetary policy strategy that flows from it need as well to evolve along several dimensions.
20
For example, under our previous flexible inflation-targeting framework, the Federal Reserve declared that the 2 percent inflation objective is "symmetric." This term has been interpreted by many observers to mean that the Committee's reaction function aimed to be symmetric on either side of the 2 percent inflation goal, and that the FOMC set policy with the (ex ante) aim that the 2 percent goal should represent an inflation ceiling in economic expansions following economic downturns in which inflation falls below target. Regarding the ELB, the previous statement was silent on the global decline in neutral policy rates, the likelihood that the ELB will constrain monetary policy space in economic downturns, and the implications of this constraint for our ability to achieve our dual-mandate goals. As for inflation expectations, the previous statement did discuss expected inflation, but only in the context of mentioning that the announcement of a 2 percent goal helps anchor inflation expectations. While this is certainly true, it does beg the deeper question of how well anchored inflation expectations can be if the 2 percent goal is seen by the public as—and turns out ex post to be—a ceiling. Regarding the maximum-employment leg of the dual mandate, the previous statement's discussion of minimizing "deviations" of employment from its maximum level does not adequately reflect how the FOMC has actually conducted monetary policy in recent years—before the pandemic—as the actual unemployment rate was declining and, for several years, remained below SEP median projections of u* (although, to be sure, the earlier statement did acknowledge that it can be difficult to estimate the maximum level of employment with precision).
21
The New Statement and Strategy
Before discussing how our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy has evolved, let me highlight some important elements that remain unchanged. First and foremost, our policy framework and strategy remain focused exclusively on meeting the dual mandate assigned to us by the Congress. Second, our statement continues to note that the maximum level of employment that we are mandated to achieve is not directly measurable and changes over time for reasons unrelated to monetary policy. Hence, we continue not to specify a numerical goal for our employment objective as we do for inflation. Third, we continue to state that an inflation rate of 2 percent over the longer run is most consistent with our mandate to promote both maximum employment and price stability. Finally, because the effect of monetary policy on the economy operates with a lag, our strategy remains forward looking. As a result, our policy actions depend on the economic outlook as well as the risks to the outlook, and we continue in the new statement to highlight potential risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of our dual-mandate goals on a sustained basis.
With respect to the new framework itself, the statement now notes that the neutral level of the federal funds rate has declined relative to its historical average and therefore that the policy rate is more likely than in the past to be constrained by its ELB, and, moreover, that this binding ELB constraint is likely to impart downside risks to inflation and employment that the Committee needs to consider in implementing its monetary policy strategy. In this regard, the statement now highlights that the Committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its dual-mandate objectives.
22
Regarding the maximum-employment mandate, the new statement now acknowledges that maximum employment is a "broad-based and inclusive goal" and continues to state that the FOMC considers a wide range of indicators to assess the level of maximum employment consistent with this broad-based goal. However, under our new framework, policy decisions going forward will be based on the FOMC's estimates of "
shortfalls
of employment from its maximum level"—not "deviations."
23
This change conveys our judgment that a low unemployment rate by itself, in the absence of evidence that price inflation is running or is likely to run persistently above mandate-consistent levels or pressing financial stability concerns, will not, under our new framework, be a sufficient trigger for policy action.
24
This is a robust evolution in the Federal Reserve's policy framework and, to me, reflects the reality that econometric models of maximum employment, while essential inputs to monetary policy, can be and have been wrong, and, moreover, that a decision to tighten monetary policy based solely on a model without any other evidence of excessive cost-push pressure that puts the price-stability mandate at risk is difficult to justify, given the significant cost to the economy if the model turns out to be wrong and given the ability of monetary policy to respond if the model were eventually to turn out to be right.
25
With regard to the price-stability mandate, while the new statement maintains our definition that the longer-run goal for inflation is 2 percent, it elevates the importance—and the challenge—of keeping inflation expectations "well anchored
at 2 percent
"
(and not just "well anchored") in a world of low r* and an ELB constraint that is binding in downturns.
26
To this end, the new statement conveys the Committee's judgment that, in order to anchor expectations at 2 percent, it "seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time," and—in the same sentence—that therefore "following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." This is the second robust evolution of our framework, and it reflects the inherent asymmetry of conducting monetary policy in a low r* world with an ELB constraint that binds in economic downturns. As discussed earlier, if policy seeks only to return inflation to 2 percent following a downturn in which the ELB has constrained policy, an inflation-targeting monetary policy will tend to generate inflation that averages less than 2 percent, which, in turn, will tend to put persistent downward pressure on inflation expectations and, potentially, on available policy space. In order to offset this downward bias, our new framework recognizes that monetary policy during economic expansions needs to "aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." In other words, the aim to achieve
symmetric
outcomes
for inflation (as would be the case under flexible inflation targeting in the absence of the ELB constraint) requires an
asymmetric
monetary policy reaction function in a low r* world with binding ELB constraints in economic downturns.
It is for this reason that while our new statement no longer refers to the 2 percent inflation goal as symmetric, it does now say that the Committee "seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time." To be clear, "inflation that averages 2 percent over time" represents an ex ante aspiration, not a description of a mechanical reaction function—nor is it a commitment to conduct monetary policy tethered to any particular formula or rule.
27
Indeed, as summarized in the minutes of the September 2019 FOMC meeting, the Committee (and, certainly, I) was skeptical about the benefit, credibility, or practicality of adopting a formal numerical price level or average inflation target rule, just as it has been unwilling to implement its existing flexible inflation-targeting strategy via any sort of mechanical rule.
28
So in practice, what, then, is the policy implication of this stated desire "to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time"? Again, the implication of our new strategy for monetary policy is stated explicitly in the new statement, and, at the risk of repeating myself, let me restate it verbatim: "… following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." Full stop. As Chair Powell indicated in his remarks last week, we think of this new strategy as an evolution from flexible inflation targeting to flexible average inflation targeting.
29
Concluding Thoughts
My remarks today have been focused on our new framework and flexible average inflation targeting strategy. Of course, our review has also explored ways in which we might add to our toolkit and refine our communication practices. With regard to our toolkit, we believe that forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases have been and continue to be effective sources of support to the economy when the federal funds rate is at the ELB, and, of course, both were deployed promptly in our March 2020 policy response to the pandemic. With regard to other monetary policy tools, and as we have made clear previously in the minutes to our October 2019 FOMC meeting, we do not see negative policy rates as an attractive policy option in the U.S. context.
30
As for targeting the yield curve, our general view is that with credible forward guidance and asset purchases, the potential benefits from such an approach may be modest. At the same time, the approach brings complications in terms of implementation and communications. Hence, as noted in the minutes from our previous meeting (July 2020), most of my colleagues judged that yield caps and targets were not warranted in the current environment but should remain an option that the Committee could reassess in the future if circumstances changed markedly.
31
Regarding communication practices, our new consensus statement does bring greater clarity and transparency to the way we will conduct policy going forward, and in that regard I note that Michelle Smith is leading our efforts to make immediately and readily available on the web a bounty of content that will be invaluable to those who desire a more granular understanding of the review process. Finally, now that we have ratified our new statement, the Committee can assess possible refinements to our SEP with the aim of reaching a decision on any potential changes by the end of this year.
32
In closing, let me say that while I was not a member of the Committee in 2012, had I been I would have voted enthusiastically for the January 2012 statement. It was the right statement, and flexible inflation targeting was the right strategy, at that time and for the next eight years. The existing framework served us well by supporting the Federal Reserve's efforts after the GFC first to achieve and then, for several years, to sustain the operation of the economy at or close to both our statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability. But times change, as has the economic landscape, and our framework and strategy need to change as well.
33
My colleagues and I believe that this new framework represents a critical and robust evolution of our monetary policy strategy that will best equip the Federal Reserve to achieve our dual-mandate objectives on a sustained basis in the world in which we conduct policy today and for the foreseeable future. Thank you very much for your time and attention, and I look forward now to my conversation with Adam.
References
Aaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). "
Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)
"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Spring, pp. 333–75.
Abraham, Katharine G., John C. Haltiwanger, and Lea E. Rendell (2020). "
How Tight Is the U.S. Labor Market? (PDF)
" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 19.
Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 54 (April), pp. 728–52.
Ajello, Andrea, Isabel Cairó, Vasco Cúrdia, Thomas A. Lubik, and Albert Queralto (2020). "
Monetary Policy Tradeoffs and the FOMC's Dual Mandate (PDF)
a," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-066. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Altig, David, Jeff Fuhrer, Marc P. Giannoni, and Thomas Laubach (2020). "
The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Framework: A Roadmap (PDF)
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 27.
Arias, Jonas, Martin Bodenstein, Hess Chung, and Thorsten Drautzburg (2020). "
Alternative Strategies: How Do They Work? How Might They Help? (PDF)
" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-068. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019). "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment,"
AEA Papers and Proceedings,
vol. 109 (May), pp. 421–26.
Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederick S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).
Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience
. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Bianchi, Francesco, Leonardo Melosi, and Matthias Rottner (2019). "
Hitting the Elusive Inflation Target (PDF)
," NBER Working Paper Series 26279. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September (revised January 2020).
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "
Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)
," IMF Working Paper WP/15/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020).
Fed Listens: Perspectives from the Public (PDF)
.
Washington: Board of Governors, June.
Caldara, Dario, Etienne Gagnon, Enrique Martínez-García, and Christopher J. Neely (2020). "
Monetary Policy and Economic Performance since the Financial Crisis (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-065. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Campbell, Jeffrey, Thomas B. King, Anna Orlik, and Rebecca Zarutskie (2020). "
Issues regarding the Use of the Policy Rate Tool (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-070. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Carlson, Mark, Stefania D'Amico, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, Bernd Schlusche, and Paul Wood (2020). "
Issues in the Use of the Balance Sheet Tool (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-071. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF)
,
report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2019). "
Improving U.S. Monetary Policy Communications (PDF)
," paper presented at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (a
Fed Listens
event), held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 4.
Chung, Hess, Brian M. Doyle, James Hebden, and Michael Siemer (2020). "
Considerations regarding Inflation Ranges (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-075. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019). "
Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Clarida, Richard H. (2016). "Good News for the Fed,"
International Economy
, Spring, pp. 44–45 and 75–76.
——— (2018a). "
Outlook for the U.S. Economy and Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 25.
——— (2018b). "
Data Dependence and U.S. Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27.
——— (2019a). "
Monetary Policy Outlook for 2019
," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, January 10, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/clarida20190110a.htm.
——— (2019b). "
The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
," speech delivered at the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, February 22.
——— (2019c). "
Models, Markets, and Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference "Strategies for Monetary Policy," Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., May 3.
——— (2020). "
Financial Markets and Monetary Policy: Is There a Hall of Mirrors Problem?
" speech delivered at the 2020 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, February 21.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"
Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661–707.
Crump, Richard K., Christopher J. Nekarda, and Nicholas Petrosky-Nadeau (2020). "
Unemployment Rate Benchmarks (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-072. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti (2017). "
Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Spring, pp. 235–94.
——— (2019). "Global Trends in Interest Rates,"
Journal of International Economics,
vol. 118 (May), pp. 248–62.
Duarte, Fernando, Benjamin K. Johannsen, Leonardo Melosi, and Taisuke Nakata (2020). "
Strengthening the FOMC's Framework in View of the Effective Lower Bound and Some Considerations Related to Time-Inconsistent Strategies (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-067. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Eberly, Janice C., James H. Stock, and Jonathan H. Wright (2020). "
The Federal Reserve's Current Framework for Monetary Policy: A Review and Assessment (PDF)
,"
International Journal of Central Banking
, vol. 16 (February), pp. 5–71.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). "
The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
, no. 1, pp. 139–233.
Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018). "
Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds.,
Handbook of Economic Forecasting,
vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2–56.
Feiveson, Laura, Nils Goernemann, Julie Hotchkiss, Karel Mertens, and Jae Sim (2020). "
Distributional Considerations for Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-073. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Fischer, Stanley (2016). "
Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Causes and Implications
," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, October 17.
Fuhrer, Jeff, Giovanni P. Olivei, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell (2018). "
Should the Federal Reserve Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)
"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
, Fall, pp. 443–97.
Goldberg, Jonathan, Elizabeth Klee, Edward Simpson Prescott, and Paul Wood (2020). "
Monetary Policy Strategy and Tools: Financial Stability Considerations (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-074. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Gust, Christopher, Edward Herbst, David López-Salido, and Matthew E. Smith (2017). "The Empirical Implications of the Interest-Rate Lower Bound,"
American Economic Review,
vol. 107 (July), pp. 1971–2006.
Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2016). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future,"
IMF Economic Review,
vol. 64 (4), pp. 660–707.
Hebden, James, Edward P. Herbst, Jenny Tang, Giorgio Topa, and Fabian Winkler (2020). "
How Robust Are Makeup Strategies to Key Alternative Assumptions? (PDF)
" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-069. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018). "
From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
Heise, Sebastian, Fatih Karahan, and Ayşegül Şahin (2020). "
The Missing Inflation Puzzle: The Role of the Wage-Price Pass-Through
," NBER Working Paper Series 27663. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"
Journal of International Economics,
vol. 108 (May, S1), pp. S59–75.
Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2018). "
A Time Series Model of Interest Rates with the Effective Lower Bound (PDF)
," BIS Working Papers 715. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, April.
Kashyap, Anil K., and Caspar Siegert (2020). "
Financial Stability Considerations and Monetary Policy (PDF)
,"
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 16 (February), pp. 231–66.
Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). "
Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Spring, pp. 317–72.
King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014). "
Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF)
," NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February.
Krugman, Paul R. (1998). "
It's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
no. 2, pp. 137–87.
Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2016). "
Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-011. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.
López-Salido, David, Gerardo Sanz-Maldonado, Carly Schippits, and Min Wei (2020). "
Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: The Role of Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 19.
Mavroeidis, Sophocles, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, and James H. Stock (2014). "Empirical Evidence on Inflation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,"
Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 52 (March), pp. 124–88.
Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams (2019). "
Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates
," Staff Report 887. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May (revised August 2019).
Obstfeld, Maurice (2020). "
Global Dimensions of U.S. Monetary Policy (PDF)
,"
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 16 (February), pp. 73–132.
Pfajfar, Damjan, and John M. Roberts (2018). "
The Role of Expectations in Changed Inflation Dynamics (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-062. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Powell, Jerome H. (2019a). "
Monetary Policy: Normalization and the Road Ahead
," delivered at the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., March 8.
——— (2019b). "
Opening Remarks: Challenges for Monetary Policy (PDF)
." In Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, ed., "Challenges for Monetary Policy,"
A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 22–24. Kansas City, Mo.: FRB Kansas City, pp. 1–16.
——— (2020). "
New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review
," speech delivered at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27.
Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017). "
Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF)
"
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 13 (September), pp. 1–42.
Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013). "
The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping? (PDF)
" in
World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.
Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 1–17.
Sims, Eric, and Jing Cynthia Wu (2020). "
Are QE and Conventional Monetary Policy Substitutable? (PDF)
"
International Journal of Central Banking
, vol. 16 (February), pp. 195–230.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997). "Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets,"
European Economic Review,
vol. 41 (June), pp. 1111–46.
——— (2020). "
Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve (PDF)
,"
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 16 (February), pp. 133–93.
Woodford, Michael (2003).
Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Wynne, Mark A., and Ren Zhang (2018). "Measuring the World Natural Rate of Interest,"
Economic Inquiry,
vol. 56 (January), pp. 530–44.
Yellen, Janet L. (2015). "
Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
1. The revised statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf
. Last week, Chair Powell made the review and the revised statement the focus of his speech at "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and held in Jackson Hole, Wyoming; see Powell (2020).
Return to text
2. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I would like to thank Etienne Gagnon, Ellen Meade, Jon Faust, and Trevor Reeve for their assistance in preparing these remarks, and Thomas Laubach for sharing with me throughout the review process his many keen insights on monetary policy strategy and communication.
Return to text
3. For a discussion of the elements that motivated the launch of the review and of how the previous policy framework had served us, see Clarida (2019b). See also Powell (2019a).
Return to text
4. See Chair Powell's address in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, last week (Powell, 2020) for an illustration of the revisions to the macroeconomic projections—including for the longer-run neutral federal funds rate—of FOMC participants as well as private and public forecasters. The downward revisions to r* over time have been informed, in part, by the general fall in interest rates and by econometric evidence that suggests that this fall is of a permanent rather than a cyclical nature. See, among many contributors, Hamilton and others (2016), Johannsen and Mertens (2018), Laubach and Williams (2016), Del Negro and others (2017), and López-Salido and others (2020). For discussions of the various factors that might have contributed to this fall, see Fischer (2016) and Rachel and Smith (2017).
Return to text
5. For evidence on the global nature of the decline in r*, see King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Wynne and Zhang (2018); and Del Negro and others (2019). For a discussion of global considerations for U.S. monetary policy, see Obstfeld (2020).
Return to text
6. For assessments of the risk that the federal funds rate will be constrained by the ELB in the future, along with policy strategies that might mitigate that risk, see Kiley and Roberts (2017); Chung and others (2019); Hebden and López-Salido (2018); and Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019).
Return to text
7. For pre-GFC discussions of the macroeconomic consequences of policy rates being constrained by the ELB, see Krugman (1998), Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), and Adam and Billi (2007). For the GFC and its aftermath, using a time-series approach, Eberly, Stock, and Wright (2020) estimate that, in the absence of the ELB constraint, the labor market recovery would have proceeded at a significantly more rapid pace than was observed, whereas core inflation would have been only modestly higher because of inflation's limited sensitivity to resource slack. Using a DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) approach, the mean estimates of Gust and others (2017) suggest that a binding ELB accounted for about 30 percent (roughly 2 percentage points) of the 6 percent contraction in gross domestic product in 2009 relative to the peak in 2007 and was responsible for an even larger fraction of the ensuing slow recovery.
Return to text
8. For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Pfajfar and Roberts (2018). The difficulties in assessing shortfalls from maximum employment using measures of the unemployment rate has motivated researchers to explore alternative approaches. See Abraham, Haltiwanger, and Rendell (2020) for an approach based on the job search and matching framework. See also the staff discussion of various concepts of unemployment rate benchmarks by Crump, Nekarda, and Petrosky-Nadeau (2020), which was prepared as background materials for this review.
Return to text
9. The large degree of uncertainty attached to estimates of r*, u*, the slope of the (short-run) Phillips curve, and other key economic objects adds additional risk-management considerations in the conduct of monetary policy, especially in a low r* environment in which the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by the ELB. See Powell (2019b) for a discussion of the implications for monetary policy and my recent remarks in Clarida (2020). See also the model-based analyses of Erceg and others (2018), Ajello and others (2020), and Hebden and others (2020).
Return to text
10. See Powell (2020) for an illustration. See also Caldara and others (2020) for a discussion of how repeated surprises in macroeconomic forecasts affect inference about the appropriate stance of policy.
Return to text
11. See Clarida (2016, 2019c) and Heise, Karahan, and Şahin (2020) for discussions.
Return to text
12. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy and Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of longer-run inflation expectations help predict inflation. Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller, and Stock (2014) discuss the challenges of identifying the precise role of expectations in determining actual inflation. Cecchetti and others (2017) suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of indicators in determining the implications for monetary policy of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.
Return to text
13. See Bernanke and others (1999) for a review of the considerations that led to the adoption of inflation-targeting frameworks and the early international experience. See Svensson (1997), Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999), and Woodford (2003) for conceptual treatments of inflation targeting, including of rational expectations.
Return to text
14. See Mertens and Williams (2019) and Bianchi, Melosi, and Rottner (2019).
Return to text
15. See Clarida (2020).
Return to text
16. See Board of Governors (2020).
Return to text
17. This special issue, which includes five of the seven papers presented at the research conference, is available on the journal's website at
https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb2002.htm
. The conference program, conference drafts, presentations, and video recordings of the sessions can be found on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/conferences/conference-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-communications-20190605.htm
.
Return to text
18. An overview of the System staff work in support of the review is presented in Altig and others (2020). Federal Reserve staff analysis on the
Fed Listens
initiative was presented and discussed at the December 2019 FOMC meeting and is part of the
Fed Listens
report.
Return to text
19. Summaries of these discussions can be found in the minutes of these FOMC meetings, which are accessible on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
20. The FOMC published the statement for the first time alongside its January 2012 postmeeting statement; the document is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20120125c.htm
. This statement has been reaffirmed each year, and was updated in 2016 to include the language on symmetry. The version of the statement that prevailed at the start of the review, which was affirmed in January 2019, can be found on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130b.htm
.
Return to text
21. See my earlier remarks on these aspects in Clarida (2018a, 2018b, 2019a).
Return to text
22. FOMC participants discussed the benefits, limitations, and risks associated with policy tools other than the setting of the federal funds rate target at various points during the review. See, notably, the summaries of FOMC participants' discussions at the July 2019 and October 2019 meetings—available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm—
which covered, respectively, the performance of these tools during the GFC and its aftermath and issues pertaining to the use of these tools in the future. See also the analyses of Sims and Wu (2020), Caldara and others (2020), Campbell and others (2020), and Carlson and others (2020), prepared for this review.
Return to text
23. Italics added for emphasis.
Return to text
24. For a discussion of financial stability considerations in the conduct of monetary policy, see Kashyap and Siegert (2020) and Goldberg and others (2020), prepared as part of this review.
Return to text
25. As I stated in Clarida (2019a, paragraph 17), "For example, were models to predict a surge in inflation, a decision for preemptive hikes before the surge is evident in actual data would need to be balanced against the cost of the model being wrong." One major cost of withdrawing policy accommodation prematurely during an economic expansion is that it prevents job opportunities from reaching all communities. A clear takeaway from our
Fed Listens
events is that the strong job market that preceded the pandemic was especially beneficial to members of low- and moderate-income communities. The prolonged economic expansion not only helped create job opportunities for marginalized groups and cement their attachment to the labor force, but, as we heard at these events, it also more generally strengthened families, businesses, and communities. See Aaronson and others (2019) for a discussion of how a strong labor market helped address labor market disparities in the previous economic expansion. See also Feiveson and others (2020) for a discussion of distributional considerations and monetary policy.
Return to text
26. Italics added for emphasis.
Return to text
27. The absence of a commitment to a specific formula or rule should not be interpreted as the absence of a commitment to achieving our mandated goals. To the contrary, the revised statement has strengthened our commitment to achieving these goals in several important ways. Notably, it has clarified that we seek to achieve 2 percent inflation, on average, over time and that, when inflation has been running persistently too low, it is appropriate to aim for inflation outcomes moderately above 2 percent for some time to solidly anchor longer-run inflation expectations at 2 percent. The revised statement also emphasizes our resolve to use our full range of tools to achieve our goals. Clarity about our goals, strategy, and tools fosters greater democratic accountability in the pursuit of our dual mandate. For a discussion of time-consistency issues in monetary policy, see the staff analysis of Duarte and others (2020), prepared for this review.
Return to text
28. A summary of the September 2019 FOMC discussion is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
. For the staff analysis presented as background to that discussion, see Arias and others (2020), Duarte and others (2020), and Hebden and others (2020). See also the related staff analysis by Chung and others (2020) on the use of operational inflation ranges.
Return to text
29. Svensson (2020) argues that "forecast targeting" approaches, by which policymakers set the federal funds rate so as to best stabilize forecasts for inflation and employment around the FOMC's longer-run goals, outperform policy strategies that respond only to current economic conditions, past economic conditions, or both. In addition, he finds that average inflation targeting offers some advantages over the other strategies that he considers.
Return to text
30. The minutes of the FOMC's October 2019 meeting are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
31. See the minutes of the FOMC's June 2020 and July 2020 meetings, which can be found on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
32. For a discussion of the importance of clear Federal Reserve communications in an uncertain economic environment, along with possible enhancements, see the paper Cecchetti and Schoenholtz (2019) prepared for the research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
Return to text
33. See Fuhrer and others (2018) for a discussion of the benefits of holding periodic reviews of central banks' monetary policy frameworks.
Return to text
Guide to changes in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy


Discurso 82
==================================================
August 27, 2020
New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At "Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy," an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, Esther, for that introduction, and good morning. The Kansas City Fed's Economic Policy Symposiums have consistently served as a vital platform for discussing the most challenging economic issues of the day. Judging by the agenda and the papers, this year will be no exception.
For the past year and a half, my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) have been conducting the first-ever public review of our monetary policy framework.
1
Earlier today we released a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, a document that lays out our goals, articulates our framework for monetary policy, and serves as the foundation for our policy actions.
2
Today I will discuss our review, the changes in the economy that motivated us to undertake it, and our revised statement, which encapsulates the main conclusions of the review.
Evolution of the Fed's Monetary Policy Framework
We began this public review in early 2019 to assess the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications that would best foster achievement of our congressionally assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability over the years ahead in service to the American people. Because the economy is always evolving, the FOMC's strategy for achieving its goals—our policy framework—must adapt to meet the new challenges that arise. Forty years ago, the biggest problem our economy faced was high and rising inflation.
3
The Great Inflation demanded a clear focus on restoring the credibility of the FOMC's commitment to price stability. Chair Paul Volcker brought that focus to bear, and the "Volcker disinflation," with the continuing stewardship of Alan Greenspan, led to the stabilization of inflation and inflation expectations in the 1990s at around 2 percent. The monetary policies of the Volcker era laid the foundation for the long period of economic stability known as the Great Moderation. This new era brought new challenges to the conduct of monetary policy. Before the Great Moderation, expansions typically ended in overheating and rising inflation. Since then, prior to the current pandemic-induced downturn, a series of historically long expansions had been more likely to end with episodes of financial instability, prompting essential efforts to substantially increase the strength and resilience of the financial system.
4
By the early 2000s, many central banks around the world had adopted a monetary policy framework known as inflation targeting.
5
Although the precise features of inflation targeting differed from country to country, the core framework always articulated an inflation goal as a primary objective of monetary policy. Inflation targeting was also associated with increased communication and transparency designed to clarify the central bank's policy intentions. This emphasis on transparency reflected what was then a new appreciation that policy is most effective when it is clearly understood by the public. Inflation-targeting central banks generally do not focus solely on inflation: Those with "flexible" inflation targets take into account economic stabilization in addition to their inflation objective.
Under Ben Bernanke's leadership, the Federal Reserve adopted many of the features associated with flexible inflation targeting.
6
We made great advances in transparency and communications, with the initiation of quarterly press conferences and the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which comprises the individual economic forecasts of FOMC participants. During that time, then–Board Vice Chair Janet Yellen led an effort on behalf of the FOMC to codify the Committee's approach to monetary policy. In January 2012, the Committee issued its first Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which we often refer to as the consensus statement. A central part of this statement was the articulation of a longer-run inflation goal of 2 percent.
7
Because the structure of the labor market is strongly influenced by nonmonetary factors that can change over time, the Committee did not set a numerical objective for maximum employment. However, the statement affirmed the Committee's commitment to fulfilling both of its congressionally mandated goals. The 2012 statement was a significant milestone, reflecting lessons learned from fighting high inflation as well as from experience around the world with flexible inflation targeting. The statement largely articulated the policy framework the Committee had been following for some time.
8
Motivation for the Review
The completion of the original consensus statement in January 2012 occurred early on in the recovery from the Global Financial Crisis, when notions of what the "new normal" might bring were quite uncertain. Since then, our understanding of the economy has evolved in ways that are central to monetary policy. Of course, the conduct of monetary policy has also evolved. A key purpose of our review has been to take stock of the lessons learned over this period and identify any further changes in our monetary policy framework that could enhance our ability to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability objectives in the years ahead.
9
Our evolving understanding of four key economic developments motivated our review. First, assessments of the potential, or longer-run, growth rate of the economy have declined. For example, since January 2012, the median estimate of potential growth from FOMC participants has fallen from 2.5 percent to 1.8 percent (see
figure 1
). Some slowing in growth relative to earlier decades was to be expected, reflecting slowing population growth and the aging of the population. More troubling has been the decline in productivity growth, which is the primary driver of improving living standards over time.
10
Second, the general level of interest rates has fallen both here in the United States and around the world. Estimates of the neutral federal funds rate, which is the rate consistent with the economy operating at full strength and with stable inflation, have fallen substantially, in large part reflecting a fall in the equilibrium real interest rate, or "r-star." This rate is not affected by monetary policy but instead is driven by fundamental factors in the economy, including demographics and productivity growth—the same factors that drive potential economic growth.
11
The median estimate from FOMC participants of the neutral federal funds rate has fallen by nearly half since early 2012, from 4.25 percent to 2.5 percent (see
figure 2
).
This decline in assessments of the neutral federal funds rate has profound implications for monetary policy. With interest rates generally running closer to their effective lower bound even in good times, the Fed has less scope to support the economy during an economic downturn by simply cutting the federal funds rate.
12
The result can be worse economic outcomes in terms of both employment and price stability, with the costs of such outcomes likely falling hardest on those least able to bear them.
Third, and on a happier note, the record-long expansion that ended earlier this year led to the best labor market we had seen in some time. The unemployment rate hovered near 50-year lows for roughly 2 years, well below most estimates of its sustainable level. And the unemployment rate captures only part of the story. Having declined significantly in the five years following the crisis, the labor force participation rate flattened out and began rising even though the aging of the population suggested that it should keep falling.
13
For individuals in their prime working years, the participation rate fully retraced its post-crisis decline, defying earlier assessments that the Global Financial Crisis might cause permanent structural damage to the labor market.
Moreover, as the long expansion continued, the gains began to be shared more widely across society. The Black and Hispanic unemployment rates reached record lows, and the differentials between these rates and the white unemployment rate narrowed to their lowest levels on record.
14
As we heard repeatedly in our
Fed Listens
events, the robust job market was delivering life-changing gains for many individuals, families, and communities, particularly at the lower end of the income spectrum.
15
In addition, many who had been left behind for too long were finding jobs, benefiting their families and communities, and increasing the productive capacity of our economy. Before the pandemic, there was every reason to expect that these gains would continue. It is hard to overstate the benefits of sustaining a strong labor market, a key national goal that will require a range of policies in addition to supportive monetary policy.
Fourth, the historically strong labor market did not trigger a significant rise in inflation. Over the years, forecasts from FOMC participants and private-sector analysts routinely showed a return to 2 percent inflation, but these forecasts were never realized on a sustained basis (see
figure 3
). Inflation forecasts are typically predicated on estimates of the natural rate of unemployment, or "u-star," and of how much upward pressure on inflation arises when the unemployment rate falls relative to u-star.
16
As the unemployment rate moved lower and inflation remained muted, estimates of u-star were revised down. For example, the median estimate from FOMC participants declined from 5.5 percent in 2012 to 4.1 percent at present (see
figure 4
). The muted responsiveness of inflation to labor market tightness, which we refer to as the flattening of the Phillips curve, also contributed to low inflation outcomes.
17
In addition, longer-term inflation expectations, which we have long seen as an important driver of actual inflation, and global disinflationary pressures may have been holding down inflation more than was generally anticipated. Other advanced economies have also struggled to achieve their inflation goals in recent decades.
The persistent undershoot of inflation from our 2 percent longer-run objective is a cause for concern. Many find it counterintuitive that the Fed would want to push up inflation. After all, low and stable inflation is essential for a well-functioning economy. And we are certainly mindful that higher prices for essential items, such as food, gasoline, and shelter, add to the burdens faced by many families, especially those struggling with lost jobs and incomes. However, inflation that is persistently too low can pose serious risks to the economy. Inflation that runs below its desired level can lead to an unwelcome fall in longer-term inflation expectations, which, in turn, can pull actual inflation even lower, resulting in an adverse cycle of ever-lower inflation and inflation expectations.
This dynamic is a problem because expected inflation feeds directly into the general level of interest rates. Well-anchored inflation expectations are critical for giving the Fed the latitude to support employment when necessary without destabilizing inflation.
18
But if inflation expectations fall below our 2 percent objective, interest rates would decline in tandem. In turn, we would have less scope to cut interest rates to boost employment during an economic downturn, further diminishing our capacity to stabilize the economy through cutting interest rates. We have seen this adverse dynamic play out in other major economies around the world and have learned that once it sets in, it can be very difficult to overcome. We want to do what we can to prevent such a dynamic from happening here.
Elements of the Review
We began our review with these changes in the economy in mind. The review had three pillars: a series of
Fed Listens
events held around the country, a flagship research conference, and a series of Committee discussions supported by rigorous staff analysis. As is appropriate in our democratic society, we have sought extensive engagement with the public throughout the review.
The
Fed Listens
events built on a long-standing practice around the Federal Reserve System of engaging with community groups. The 15 events involved a wide range of participants—workforce development groups, union members, small business owners, residents of low- and moderate-income communities, retirees, and others—to hear about how our policies affect peoples' daily lives and livelihoods.
19
The stories we heard at
Fed Listens
events became a potent vehicle for us to connect with the people and communities that our policies are intended to benefit. One of the clear messages we heard was that the strong labor market that prevailed before the pandemic was generating employment opportunities for many Americans who in the past had not found jobs readily available. A clear takeaway from these events was the importance of achieving and sustaining a strong job market, particularly for people from low- and moderate-income communities.
The research conference brought together some of the world's leading academic experts to address topics central to our review, and the presentations and robust discussion we engaged in were an important input to our review process.
20
Finally, the Committee explored the range of issues that were brought to light during the course of the review in five consecutive meetings beginning in July 2019. Analytical staff work put together by teams across the Federal Reserve System provided essential background for each of the Committee's discussions.
21
Our plans to conclude the review earlier this year were, like so many things, delayed by the arrival of the pandemic. When we resumed our discussions last month, we turned our attention to distilling the most important lessons of the review in a revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
New Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy
The federated structure of the Federal Reserve, reflected in the FOMC, ensures that we always have a diverse range of perspectives on monetary policy, and that is certainly the case today. Nonetheless, I am pleased to say that the revised consensus statement was adopted today with the unanimous support of Committee participants. Our new consensus statement, like its predecessor, explains how we interpret the mandate Congress has given us and describes the broad framework that we believe will best promote our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. Before addressing the key changes in our statement, let me highlight some areas of continuity. We continue to believe that specifying a numerical goal for employment is unwise, because the maximum level of employment is not directly measurable and changes over time for reasons unrelated to monetary policy. The significant shifts in estimates of the natural rate of unemployment over the past decade reinforce this point. In addition, we have not changed our view that a longer-run inflation rate of 2 percent is most consistent with our mandate to promote both maximum employment and price stability. Finally, we continue to believe that monetary policy must be forward looking, taking into account the expectations of households and businesses and the lags in monetary policy's effect on the economy. Thus, our policy actions continue to depend on the economic outlook as well as the risks to the outlook, including potential risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of our goals.
The key innovations in our new consensus statement reflect the changes in the economy I described. Our new statement explicitly acknowledges the challenges posed by the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound. By reducing our scope to support the economy by cutting interest rates, the lower bound increases downward risks to employment and inflation.
22
To counter these risks, we are prepared to use our full range of tools to support the economy.
With regard to the employment side of our mandate, our revised statement emphasizes that maximum employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal. This change reflects our appreciation for the benefits of a strong labor market, particularly for many in low- and moderate-income communities.
23
In addition, our revised statement says that our policy decision will be informed by our "assessments of the
shortfalls
of employment from its maximum level" rather than by "
deviations
from its maximum level" as in our previous statement.
24
This change may appear subtle, but it reflects our view that a robust job market can be sustained without causing an outbreak of inflation.
In earlier decades when the Phillips curve was steeper, inflation tended to rise noticeably in response to a strengthening labor market. It was sometimes appropriate for the Fed to tighten monetary policy as employment rose toward its estimated maximum level in order to stave off an unwelcome rise in inflation. The change to "shortfalls" clarifies that, going forward, employment can run at or above real-time estimates of its maximum level without causing concern, unless accompanied by signs of unwanted increases in inflation or the emergence of other risks that could impede the attainment of our goals.
25
Of course, when employment is below its maximum level, as is clearly the case now, we will actively seek to minimize that shortfall by using our tools to support economic growth and job creation.
We have also made important changes with regard to the price-stability side of our mandate. Our longer-run goal continues to be an inflation rate of 2 percent. Our statement emphasizes that our actions to achieve both sides of our dual mandate will be most effective if longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. However, if inflation runs below 2 percent following economic downturns but never moves above 2 percent even when the economy is strong, then, over time, inflation will average less than 2 percent. Households and businesses will come to expect this result, meaning that inflation expectations would tend to move below our inflation goal and pull realized inflation down. To prevent this outcome and the adverse dynamics that could ensue, our new statement indicates that we will seek to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. Therefore, following periods when inflation has been running below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time.
In seeking to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, we are not tying ourselves to a particular mathematical formula that defines the average. Thus, our approach could be viewed as a flexible form of average inflation targeting.
26
Our decisions about appropriate monetary policy will continue to reflect a broad array of considerations and will not be dictated by any formula. Of course, if excessive inflationary pressures were to build or inflation expectations were to ratchet above levels consistent with our goal, we would not hesitate to act.
The revisions to our statement add up to a robust updating of our monetary policy framework. To an extent, these revisions reflect the way we have been conducting policy in recent years. At the same time, however, there are some important new features. Overall, our new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy conveys our continued strong commitment to achieving our goals, given the difficult challenges presented by the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound. In conducting monetary policy, we will remain highly focused on fostering as strong a labor market as possible for the benefit of all Americans. And we will steadfastly seek to achieve a 2 percent inflation rate over time.
Looking Ahead
Our review has provided a platform for productive discussion and engagement with the public we serve. The
Fed Listens
events helped us connect with our core constituency, the American people, and hear directly how their everyday lives are affected by our policies. We believe that conducting a review at regular intervals is a good institutional practice, providing valuable feedback and enhancing transparency and accountability. And with the ever-changing economy, future reviews will allow us to take a step back, reflect on what we have learned, and adapt our practices as we strive to achieve our dual-mandate goals. As our statement indicates, we plan to undertake a thorough public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices roughly every five years.
References
Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). "
Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
,
Fall, pp. 197–275.
Aaronson, Stephanie, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Spring, pp. 333–75, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Aaronson_web.pdf.
Altig, David, Jeff Fuhrer, Marc P. Giannoni, and Thomas Laubach (2020). "
The Federal Reserve's Review of its Monetary Policy Framework: A Roadmap
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 27.
Arias, Jonas, Martin Bodenstein, Hess Chung, Thorsten Drautzburg, and Andrea Raffo (2020). "
Alternative Strategies: How Do They Work? How Might They Help?
" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-068. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen (1999).
Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997). "Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?"
Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 11 (Spring), pp. 97–116.
Blanchard, Olivier J., Eugenio M. Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). "
Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications
," IMF Working Paper 15/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012). "
Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 24–25, 2012 (PDF)
," transcript. Washington: Board of Governors.
——— (2018). "
Federal Reserve to Review Strategies, Tools, and Communication Practices It Uses to Pursue Its Mandate of Maximum Employment and Price Stability
," press release, November 15.
——— (2020a),
Monetary Policy Report (PDF)
.
Washington: Board of Governors, February.
——— (2020b).
Fed Listens: Perspectives from the Public (PDF)
,
report. Washington: Board of Governors, June.
Caldara, Dario, Etienne Gagnon, Enrique Martínez-García, and Christopher J. Neely (2020). "
Monetary Policy and Economic Performance since the Financial Crisis
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-065. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Clarida, Richard H. (2019). "
The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
," speech delivered at the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, February 22.
Crump, Richard, Christopher Nekarda, and Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau (2020). "
Unemployment Rate Benchmarks
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-072. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Daly, Mary C. (2020). "
We Can't Afford Not To
," speech delivered at the National Press Club Virtual Event, Washington, June 15.
Duarte, Fernando, Benjamin K. Johannsen, Leonardo Melosi, and Taisuke Nakata (2020). "
Strengthening the FOMC's Framework in View of the Effective Lower Bound and Some Considerations Related to Time-Inconsistent Strategies
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-067. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Feiveson, Laura, Nils Goernemann, Julie Hotchkiss, Karel Mertens, and Jae Sim (2020). "
Distributional Considerations for Monetary Policy Strategy
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-073. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Fernald, John G. (2015). "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," in Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014,
vol. 29
.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press
,
pp. 1–51.
——— (2018). "Is Slow Productivity and Output Growth in Advanced Economies the New Normal?"
International Productivity Monitor,
vol. 35 (Fall), pp. 138–48.
Fuhrer, Jeff, Giovanni P. Olivei, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell (2018). "
Should the Federal Reserve Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)
"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Fall, pp. 443–97.
Goodfriend, Marvin (2007). "How the World Achieved Consensus on Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives
,
vol. 21 (Fall), pp. 47–68.
Gordon, Robert J. (2017).
The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Hebden, James, Edward P. Herbst, Jenny Tang, Giorgio Topa, and Fabian Winkler (2020). "
How Robust Are Makeup Strategies to Key Alternative Assumptions?
" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-069. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"
Journal of International Economics,
vol. 108 (May, S1), pp. S59–75.
Lopez-Salido, David, Gerardo Sanz-Maldonado, Carly Schippits, and Min Wei (2020). "
Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: The Role of Inflation Expectations
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 19.
Lunsford, Kurt G., and Kenneth D. West (2019). "Some Evidence on Secular Drivers of U.S. Safe Real Rates,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
,
vol. 11 (October), pp. 113–39.
Powell, Jerome H. (2018). "
Opening Remarks: Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy (PDF)
." In Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, ed.,
Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy: A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–25. Kansas City, Mo.: FRB Kansas City, pp. 1– 18.
——— (2019). "
Opening Remarks: Challenges for Monetary Policy (PDF)
." In Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, ed.,
Challenges for Monetary Policy:
A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 22–24. Kansas City, Mo.: FRB Kansas City, pp. 1–16.
Svensson, Lars E. O. (1999). "Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,"
Journal of Monetary Economics
,
vol. 43 (June), pp. 607–54.
——— (2020). "
Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve (PDF)
,"
International Journal of Central Banking
,
vol. 16 (February), pp. 133–93.
Volcker, Paul A. (2008).
Interview (PDF)
by Donald L. Kohn, Lynn S. Fox, and David H. Small (second day of interview),
Federal Reserve Board Oral History Project,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Washington: Board of Governors, January 28.
Volcker, Paul A., and Toyoo Gyohten (1992).
Changing Fortunes: The World's Money and the Threat to American Leadership.
New York: Crown.
1. See Board of Governors (2018) and Clarida (2019).
Return to text
2. The revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20200827a.htm
.
Return to text
3. Consumer price inflation, which was running below 2 percent in the early 1960s, had risen into the double digits by the late 1970s and was slightly above 12 percent when the Committee gathered for an unscheduled meeting in the Eccles Building in Washington, D.C., on a Saturday in October 1979—before the days when transparency was the hallmark of institutional accountability—and decided to change the conduct of monetary policy. See Volcker and Gyohten (1992); also see Volcker (2008), pp. 73–74.
Return to text
4. See Powell (2019).
Return to text
5. For a readable explanation of inflation targeting, see Bernanke and Mishkin (1997); also see Bernanke and others (1999).
Return to text
6. For the formalization and development of the concept of flexible inflation targeting, see Svensson (1999) and, more recently, Svensson (2020).
Return to text
7. As measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures.
Return to text
8. See Board of Governors (2012), p. 43.
Return to text
9. On the benefits of holding a review, see Fuhrer and others (2018).
Return to text
10. Between 1995 and 2003, business-sector output per hour increased at an annual rate of 3.4 percent, and it has risen only 1.4 percent since then. Fernald (2015) suggests 2003 as a break point for the beginning of the productivity slowdown. See also Fernald (2018), Gordon (2017), and Powell (2018).
Return to text
11. Estimates of r-star have fallen between 2 and 3 percentage points over the past two decades. For evidence on the secular decline in interest rates in the United States and abroad see, for instance, Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017) and Lunsford and West (2019). See also the recent evidence in Lopez-Salido and others (2020).
Return to text
12. Both the experience following the Global Financial Crisis and the current situation drive this point home. After the Global Financial Crisis, the Fed held the federal funds rate at the lower bound for seven years. Thereafter, as the economy strengthened, the federal funds rate reached a peak just above 2 percent. By comparison, the federal funds rate averaged a little more than 5 percent in the 1990s. And, at the onset of the COVID pandemic, we quickly cut rates to the effective lower bound. But since the federal funds rate was only about 1-1/2 percent before the pandemic—because that is what the economy required at that time—our scope to reduce the federal funds rate was far less than in earlier recessions.
Return to text
13. The labor force participation rate for prime-age individuals (those between 25 and 54 years old), which is much less sensitive to the effects of population aging, has been rising over the past few years and continued to increase in 2019. For a longer-run perspective, see the analysis presented in Aaronson and others (2014).
Return to text
14. The decline in the unemployment rate for African Americans has been particularly sizable, and its average rate in the second half of October 2019 was the lowest recorded since the data began to be reported in 1972; see Board of Governors (2020a). See also Daly (2020) and Aaronson and others (2019).
Return to text
15. Information on the
Fed Listens
events is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm
.
Return to text
16. A discussion of various concepts of unemployment rate benchmarks that are frequently used by policymakers for assessing the current state of the economy is presented in Crump and others (2020).
Return to text
17. See, for instance, Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015).
Return to text
18. The success of monetary policy in taming high and variable inflation in the 1980s and 1990s was instrumental in anchoring inflation expectations at low levels. See, for instance, Goodfriend (2007).
Return to text
19. See the report
Fed Listens: Perspectives from the Public (Board of Governors, 2020b)
, which summarizes the 14
Fed Listens
events hosted by the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks during 2019, as well as an additional event in May 2020 to follow up with participants about the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on their communities. Information on the individual
Fed Listens
events is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm
.
Return to text
20. The Federal Reserve System's "Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (A
Fed Listens
Event)" was hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago in June 2019. See
https://www.federalreserve.gov/conferences/conference-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-communications-20190605.htm
for the conference program, links to the conference papers and presentations, and links to session videos. A special issue of the
International Journal of Central Banking
(February 2020) included five of the seven papers presented at the conference (see
https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb2002.htm
).
Return to text
21. See the overview presented in Altig and others (2020).
Return to text
22. See Caldara and others (2020).
Return to text
23. The analysis of how alternative strategies that succeed in reducing the frequency and/or severity of ELB recessions can induce longer run beneficial effects on economic inequality is presented in Feiveson and others (2020).
Return to text
24. Italics added for emphasis. The 2012 statement noted that the Committee would mitigate "deviations" of employment from the Committee's assessments of its maximum level, suggesting that the Committee would actively seek to lower employment if it assessed that employment was above the Committee's estimate of its maximum level. In practice, the Committee has not conducted policy in this way, but rather has supported continued gains in the labor market.
Return to text
25. In addition, because real-time estimates are highly uncertain, we no longer refer to estimates of the natural rate of unemployment from the SEP in our consensus statement. Another reason for dropping this reference is that the unemployment rate does not adequately capture the full range of experience in the labor market. The SEP will continue to report FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run level of the unemployment rate, as such information remains a useful, albeit highly incomplete, input into our policy deliberations.
Return to text
26. This strategy embodies some key lessons from the general class of makeup strategies that have been analyzed extensively in the economics literature. The literature has emphasized that the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound poses an asymmetric challenge for monetary policy, increasing the likelihood that inflation and employment will tend to be too low. An extensive discussion about how these issues affect the design of monetary policy, as well as the relevant related literature, can be found in Duarte and others (2020), Arias and others (2020), and Hebden and others (2020).
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 83
==================================================
June 19, 2020
Introductory Comments
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At "Building a Resilient Workforce," a video conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Youngstown, Ohio (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Thank you, President Mester and Treye Johnson, and thanks to everyone for joining us. My job today is to listen, so I will keep my remarks short. But I do want to say that these conversations are incredibly valuable. They give context to reams of data and definition to a huge and complex economic picture. They also help solve problems on a practical level. Feedback from our Investing in America's Workforce initiative found a pronounced need for workforce and economic development programs to more closely align, for instance. And employers' input has influenced work across the Fed System, including the Cleveland Fed, as they look at how skills on the lower end of the pay scale can transfer to higher-earning jobs. So from me, and on behalf of my colleagues: Thank you for your time today and for your ongoing insight.
It is not lost on me that we are meeting on Juneteenth amid a renewed reckoning of racial injustice. The pandemic has again exposed a range of troubling inequalities, most of them of long standing. As the national discussion continues, it is critical to remember that equity includes access to education, work, and economic opportunity. I am reminded that Dr. King delivered his "I Have a Dream" speech, just a few short blocks from the Federal Reserve, at a rally whose full title was the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.
We meet today amid the immense hardship and suffering the coronavirus has caused. Lives and livelihoods have been lost, and uncertainty looms large. We are all grateful to our frontline health-care workers who put themselves in harm's way every day and to the essential workers helping us meet our needs. While we are all affected, the burden has fallen disproportionately on those least able to bear it.
Before the virus swept across the globe, the American economy was in a good place. We were experiencing the longest expansion on record, and unemployment had reached historic lows. However, that is a national average that can gloss over stark realities. That economic good fortune had eluded pockets across the country, including Youngstown. A particular cruelty of the pandemic has been its disproportionate effects on many areas that were already suffering.
We will make our way back from this, but it will take time and work. Some of the most valuable information we get from these discussions is how people are working to create growth. Your feedback can be an invaluable example for other communities with similar challenges. The Lordstown closure served as a reminder of how interconnected local economies can be, and other areas have experienced similar losses. Your work on diversifying the economy, on skills development, on small business support programs, and in so many other areas can all serve as models for others to replicate.
The path ahead is likely to be challenging. But given the opportunity, I'll always bet on the American people and on the kind of community resolve and dedication we're hearing about today. I'm looking forward to your insight and to hearing more about how you've been working to revitalize Youngstown's economy.
Thank you.


Discurso 84
==================================================
June 16, 2020
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy (via prerecorded video)
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the Foreign Policy Association, New York, New York
Share
Watch Live
It is my pleasure to meet virtually this evening with the members and invited guests of the Foreign Policy Association (FPA).
1
I am truly honored to receive the Foreign Policy Association Medal. Past honorees have included Sheila Bair, Anne-Marie Slaughter, Paul Volcker, Jean-Claude Trichet, and my Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) colleague John Williams—and so with this award, I am indeed in select company. Although I have been very much looking forward to receiving this award in person, that, of course, is not possible tonight, but I greatly look forward to attending a future dinner to convey in person my genuine appreciation to the members of the FPA for this special honor. Since mid-March, I, along with my FOMC colleagues, have been working from home. Indeed, just last week, we held our scheduled June meeting via secure teleconference. And while I certainly miss the opportunities for face-to-face interactions along the corridors of the Board's Eccles Building, I am grateful to have the ability to work from home and want to convey my deep gratitude to all of those on the frontlines of the crisis, who are working outside the comfort of their homes in grocery stores, hospitals, and other businesses that provide essential services.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
While the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has taken a tragic human toll measured in terms of lives lost and suffering inflicted, the pandemic has also inflicted a heavy toll on the levels of activity and employment in the U.S. economy, as a direct result of the necessary public health policies put in place to mitigate and control the spread of the virus. Real gross domestic product (GDP) declined at a 5 percent annual rate in the first quarter of the year and will almost surely continue to contract at an unprecedented pace in the second quarter. The unemployment rate, which reached a 50-year low of 3.5 percent as recently as February of this year, surged to 14.7 percent in April, an 80-year high. In May, there was a notable rebound in employment and decline in unemployment, and these developments are certainly welcome. Moreover, in recent weeks, some other indicators suggest a stabilization or even a modest rebound in some segments of the economy. But activity in many parts of the economy has yet to pick up, and GDP is falling deeply below its recent peak. And, of course, despite the improvements seen in the May jobs report, the unemployment rate, at 13.3 percent, remains historically high.
After the extreme turbulence witnessed in March, financial markets across many sectors have normalized and are again serving their essential role of intermediating flows of savings and investment among borrowers and lenders. Bank credit lines are providing liquidity to companies, and corporations with debt rated investment grade and high yield are able to issue, and in size, in the corporate bond market. I believe—and most outside observers agree—that this easing of financial conditions since March is, at least in part, the direct consequence of economic policy responses to the crisis, including the actions the Federal Reserve took at our March 15 meeting and the subsequent announcement and sequential launch of 11 new facilities to support the flow of credit to households and companies. While this easing of financial conditions is, of course, welcome to the extent that it supports the flow of credit to households and firms during this challenging period, it may not prove to be durable, depending on the course that the coronavirus contagion takes and the duration of the recession that it causes. At minimum, the easing of financial conditions is buying some time until the economy begins to recover.
As I speak to you today, there is extraordinary uncertainty about both the depth and the duration of the economic downturn. Because the course of the economy will depend on the course of the virus and the public health policies put in place to mitigate and contain it, there is an unusually wide range of scenarios for the evolution of the economy that could plausibly play out over the next several years. In my baseline view, while I do believe it will likely take some time for economic activity and the labor market to fully recover from the pandemic shock, I do project right now that the economy will resume growth starting in the third quarter. In terms of inflation, my projection is for the COVID-19 contagion shock to be disinflationary, not inflationary, and the data we are seeing so far are consistent with this projection. For example, core CPI (consumer price inflation) prices fell 0.4 percent in April, the largest monthly decrease since the beginning of the series in 1957. Although the decline in core CPI was smaller in May, on a year-over-year basis, core CPI is running at 1.2 percent, the slowest pace in nine years. While the COVID-19 shock is disrupting both aggregate demand and supply, the net effect, I believe, will be for aggregate demand to decline relative to aggregate supply, both in the near term and over the medium term. If so, downward pressure on PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation, which was already running somewhat below our 2 percent objective when the downturn began in March, will continue. Moreover, I judge that measures of longer-term inflation expectations were, when the downturn began, at the low end of a range that I consider consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective and, given the likely depth of this downturn, are at risk of falling below that range. The Federal Reserve has a dual mandate from the Congress to pursue policies that aim to achieve and sustain maximum employment and price stability. To me, price stability requires that inflation expectations remain well anchored at our 2 percent objective, and I will place a high priority on advocating policies that will be directed at achieving not only maximum employment, but also well-anchored inflation expectations consistent with our 2 percent objective.
The Policy Response
At the Federal Reserve, we take our dual-mandate obligations of maximum employment and price stability very seriously, and, since March 3, we have deployed our entire toolkit to provide critical support to the economy during this challenging time. In two unscheduled meetings, we voted on March 3 and March 15 to cut the target range for the federal funds rate by a total of 150 basis points to its current range of 0 to 25 basis points.
2
In our FOMC statements, we have indicated we expect to maintain the target range at this level until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
On March 16, we launched a program to purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in whatever amounts needed to support smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. To date, these purchases have totaled more than $2.3 trillion, and, as we indicated at our June meeting, they will continue in coming months at least at the current pace, which should sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions.
Since March 17, the Board has announced the establishment of no fewer than 11 new facilities to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. These programs are authorized under emergency lending powers granted to the Fed under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act and are available only in "unusual and exigent" circumstances and with the consent of the Secretary of Treasury.
3
These facilities are supported with money invested by the Department of the Treasury, drawing on appropriations of more than $450 billion authorized by the Congress in the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) for the specific purpose of investing in Fed programs to sustain the flow of credit to households, firms, and communities during the coronavirus pandemic. With these facilities, we are providing a bridge by stepping in and supporting lending throughout the economy until the recovery takes hold. These programs are designed to offer backstop sources of funding to the private sector, and just the announcement that these backstop facilities would soon be launched appears to have bolstered confidence in capital markets, allowing many companies to finance themselves privately even before the facilities were up and running. But importantly, these are, after all, emergency facilities, and someday—hopefully soon—the emergency will pass. When that day comes and we are confident the economy is solidly on the road to recovery, we will wind down these lending facilities at such time as we determine the circumstances we confront are no longer unusual or exigent.
The Federal Reserve has played a leading role in the global economic policy response to the coronavirus pandemic. Foreign financial institutions borrow and lend in U.S. dollars, and these dollar funding markets seized up when COVID-19 emerged. In globally integrated financial markets such as ours, these strains in dollar funding markets outside the United States affect the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. As such, during the week of March 15, the Federal Reserve coordinated with five foreign central banks to enhance its standing dollar liquidity swap lines.
4
In addition, temporary swap lines were reestablished with the nine central banks that had temporary agreements during the Global Financial Crisis.
5
Moreover, to support dollar liquidity to a broad range of countries, the Federal Reserve announced a new program on March 31, the temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility. Under this facility, FIMA account holders at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (which include central banks and other monetary authorities) can enter into overnight repos (repurchase agreements) with the Federal Reserve, temporarily exchanging U.S. Treasury securities in their accounts for U.S. dollars, which can then be provided to institutions in their respective jurisdictions. All of these facilities have had a very constructive effect in calming down dollar funding markets and supporting a return to more normal conditions in global financial markets more generally.
Of course, as members of the FPA, you are well aware that developments in the U.S. economy do not happen in isolation from the rest of the world. We live in a globally integrated economy. With COVID-19, all countries have been hit by a global common shock, not only directly by the virus and the measures necessary to combat it, but also by the economic spillovers from those actions around the world. As in the United States, many foreign authorities have taken swift and forceful actions in response. My colleagues and I have worked closely with others—bilaterally and in international forums like the Group of Seven, Group of Twenty, Bank for International Settlements, and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development—to monitor and address the effects of the pandemic. The forcefulness and synchronized timing of actions by fiscal authorities, central banks, and regulators have helped support the incomes of households and firms and reduce market stresses that could have amplified the shock.
Not only is the Federal Reserve using its full range of tools to support the economy through this challenging time, but our policies will also help ensure that the rebound in activity when it commences will be as robust as possible. That said, it is important to note that the Fed's statutory authority grants us lending powers, not spending powers. The Fed is not authorized to grant money to particular beneficiaries, to meet the payroll expenses of small businesses, or to underwrite the unemployment benefits of displaced workers. Programs to support such worthy goals reside squarely in the domain of fiscal policy. The Fed can only make loans to solvent entities with the expectation the loans will be paid back. Direct fiscal support for the economy is thus also essential to sustain economic activity and complement what monetary policy cannot accomplish on its own. Direct fiscal support can make a critical difference, not just in helping families and businesses stay afloat in a time of need, but also in sustaining the productive capacity of the economy after we emerge from this downturn.
Fortunately, the fiscal policy response in the United States to the coronavirus shock has been both robust and timely. In four pieces of legislation passed in just over two months, the Congress voted $2.9 trillion in coronavirus relief, about 14 percent of GDP. Depending on the course of the virus and the course of the economy, more support from both fiscal and monetary policy may be called for.
Concluding Remarks
The coronavirus pandemic poses the most serious threat to maximum employment and, potentially, to price stability that the United States has faced in our lifetimes. There is much that policymakers—and epidemiologists—simply do not know right now about the potential course that the virus, and thus the economy, will take. But there is one thing that I am certain about: The Federal Reserve will continue to act forcefully, proactively, and aggressively as we deploy our toolkit—including our balance sheet, forward guidance, and lending facilities—to provide critical support to the economy during this challenging time and to do all we can to make sure that the recovery from this downturn, once it commences, is as robust as possible.
1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Brian Doyle and Chiara Scotti of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance in preparing this text.
Return to text
2. See the FOMC statements issued after the March 3 and March 15 FOMC meetings, which are available (along with other postmeeting statements) on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
3. See
Federal Reserve Act
, 12 U.S.C. § 343 (1932), quoted text in paragraph 3.A.
Return to text
4. The swap fee was reduced from 50 basis points to 25 basis points over the U.S. dollar overnight index swap rate. To better target stresses in funding markets for longer-term dollar borrowing, swap operations with a maturity of 84 days were added to the usual 7-day operations by the four central banks that traditionally hold regular auctions—the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank. Finally, these four central banks announced that they would begin daily auctions. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Coordinated Central Bank Action to Enhance the Provision of U.S. Dollar Liquidity
," press release, March 15; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Coordinated Central Bank Action to Further Enhance the Provision of U.S. Dollar Liquidity
," press release, March 20.
Return to text
5. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Federal Reserve Announces the Establishment of Temporary U.S. Dollar Liquidity Arrangements with Other Central Banks
," press release, March 19.
Return to text


Discurso 85
==================================================
May 21, 2020
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At "A Fed Listens Event: How Is COVID-19 Affecting Your Community?," sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Good afternoon. I just want to say a few words of welcome and thank everyone for being here—albeit in much different circumstances than would otherwise be expected.
We've held many
Fed Listens
events over the past 16 months, and it's important to note that these conversations aren't just a nice way to talk to people from around the country, although they are that. What they provide—what you provide—is insight that we just can't get anywhere else. You add depth and definition to the flood of data that flows through the Fed each day. You give us perspective on the economic realities that don't show up on a spreadsheet. You help us see those complex sets of data that analyze the American economy through the eyes of the people, businesses, and communities that make up the American economy. And that information is very helpful to us as we make our policy decisions.
So this is a valuable exercise for us. And an enjoyable one as well, so we truly do appreciate it on a number of levels. The Reserve Banks are also continuing to host conversations in communities across the country to help capture economic realities on the ground.
We are in the midst of an economic downturn without modern precedent. It was sudden, and it is severe. It has already erased the job gains of the past decade and has inflicted acute pain across the country. And while the burden is widespread, it is not evenly spread. Those taking the brunt of the fallout are those least able to bear it.
The pain of this downturn is compounded by the upending of normal life, along with great uncertainty about the future. In the best of times, predicting the path of the economy with any certainty is difficult. John Kenneth Galbraith famously said that economic forecasting exists to make astrology look respectable. We are now experiencing a whole new level of uncertainty, as questions only the virus can answer complicate the outlook.
Policies that address the resumption of economic activity are the province of elected officials at all levels of government, in close consultation with public health and medical professionals. But all of us have our own decisions to make as well, and those decisions will depend on public confidence that it is again safe to undertake various activities. From an economic perspective, we hope to learn a lot from your experiences and from what you're hearing from your colleagues, customers, and communities: How they're coping with that uncertainty now, how they're thinking about a future that's harder to plan for, and what matters most as they navigate the path.
The feedback we get from our community and business contacts has always been crucial in how we conduct monetary policy. In extraordinary times such as these, it takes on even greater importance. I want to thank you again for providing that insight and look forward to the conversation.
Thank you.
Related Content
Fed Listens
: How is COVID-19 Affecting Your Community?
Fed Listens
Events


Discurso 86
==================================================
May 21, 2020
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, New York (via webcast)
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the New York Association for Business Economics.
1
I have been looking forward to this session, and I am sorry that I cannot join you in person, as I always value my opportunities for dialogue with business and market economists. Since mid-March, along with my Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) colleagues, I have been working from home. While I certainly miss the opportunities for face-to-face interactions along the corridors of the Board's Eccles Building, I am grateful to be able to work from home and want to convey my deep gratitude to all of those on the frontlines of the crisis, who are working outside the comfort of their homes in hospitals, emergency services, and care facilities.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
While the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has taken a tragic human toll measured in terms of lives lost and suffering inflicted, as a direct result of the necessary public health policies put in place to mitigate and control the spread of the virus, the pandemic has also inflicted a heavy toll on the levels of activity and employment in the U.S. economy. Real gross domestic product (GDP) declined at a 4.8 percent annual rate in the first quarter of the year and will almost surely continue to contract at an unprecedented pace in the second quarter. The unemployment rate, which was at a 50‑year low of 3.5 percent as recently as February, surged in April by more than 10 percentage points to 14.7 percent, an 80-year high, and it is likely to rise further in May. To put the numbers in some context, more jobs were lost in March and April of this year than had been created in the previous nine years.
But while the economic news has been unremittingly awful in recent weeks, financial conditions since the middle of March have eased—and considerably so in many markets. I believe—and most outside observers agree—that this easing of financial conditions is, at least in part, a direct consequence of the actions the Federal Reserve took at our March 15 meeting, the subsequent announcements over the following days of the creation of nine new credit facilities to support the flow of credit to households and companies, the robust expansion of our existing foreign exchange swap arrangements with major foreign central banks, and the establishment of a new FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility with potential eligibility for a broad range of countries.
2
While this easing of financial conditions is, of course, welcome, whether it proves to be durable will depend importantly on the course that the coronavirus contagion takes and the duration of the downturn that it causes. At a minimum, the easing of financial conditions is buying some time until the economy can begin to recover, growth resumes, and unemployment begins to fall.
As I speak to you today, there is extraordinary uncertainty about both the depth and the duration of the economic downturn. Because the course of the economy will depend on the course of the virus and the public health policies put in place to mitigate and contain it, there is an unusually wide range of scenarios for the evolution of the economy that could plausibly play out over the next several years. In my baseline view, while I do believe it will likely take some time for economic activity and the labor market to fully recover from the pandemic shock, I do project right now that the economy will begin to grow and that the unemployment rate will begin to decline starting in the second half of this year. In terms of inflation, my projection is for the COVID-19 contagion shock to be disinflationary, not inflationary, and the data we are seeing so far are consistent with this projection. For example, core CPI (consumer price inflation) prices fell 0.45 percent in April, the largest monthly decrease since the beginning of the series in 1957. While the COVID-19 shock is disrupting both aggregate demand and supply, the net effect, I believe, will be for aggregate demand to decline relative to aggregate supply, both in the near term and over the medium term. If so, this decrease will put downward pressure on core inflation, which was already running somewhat below our 2 percent objective when the downturn began in March. Moreover, as I have indicated previously, I judge that measures of longer-term inflation expectations were, when the downturn began, at the low end of a range that I consider consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.
The Policy Response
At the Federal Reserve, we take our dual-mandate obligations of maximum employment and price stability very seriously, and, since March 3, we have deployed our entire toolkit to provide critical support to the economy during this challenging time. In two unscheduled meetings, we voted on March 3 and 15 to cut the target range for the federal funds rate by a total of 150 basis points to its current range of 0 to 25 basis points. In our FOMC statements, we have indicated we expect to maintain the target range at this level until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
On March 16, we launched a program to purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in whatever amounts needed to support smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. To date, these purchases have totaled more than $2 trillion, and, as we indicated following our April FOMC meeting, they are continuing but at a reduced pace, reflecting the substantial improvement in market functioning that has occurred since the program was launched two months ago.
Since March 17, the Federal Reserve Board has announced the establishment of no fewer than nine new facilities to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. These programs are authorized under emergency lending powers granted to the Fed under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act and are available only in "unusual and exigent" circumstances and with the consent of the Secretary of Treasury.
3
I think you will agree that today we face circumstances that are both exigent and unusual. These facilities are supported with money invested by the Department of the Treasury, drawing on appropriations of more than $450 billion authorized by the Congress in the Cares Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) for the specific purpose of investing in Fed programs to sustain the flow of credit to households, firms, and communities during the coronavirus pandemic.
With these facilities, we are providing a bridge by stepping in and supporting lending throughout the economy until the recovery takes hold. These programs are designed to offer backstop sources of funding to the private sector, and just the announcement that these backstop facilities would soon be launched appears to have bolstered confidence in capital markets, allowing many companies to finance themselves privately even before the facilities were up and running. But importantly, these are, after all, emergency facilities, and someday—hopefully soon—the emergency will pass. When that day comes and we are confident the economy is solidly on the road to recovery, we will wind down these lending facilities at such time as we determine the circumstances we confront are no longer unusual or exigent.
Not only is the Federal Reserve using its full range of tools to support the economy through this challenging time, but our policies will also help ensure that the rebound in activity when it commences will be as robust as possible. That said, it is important to note that the Fed's statutory authority grants us
lending
powers, not
spending
powers. The Fed is not authorized to grant money to particular beneficiaries, to meet the payroll expenses of small businesses, or to underwrite the unemployment benefits of displaced workers. Programs to support such worthy goals reside squarely in the domain of fiscal policy. The Fed can only make loans to solvent entities with the expectation the loans will be paid back. Direct fiscal support for the economy is thus also essential to sustain economic activity and complement what monetary policy cannot accomplish on its own. Direct fiscal support can make a critical difference, not just in helping families and businesses stay afloat in a time of need, but also in sustaining the productive capacity of the economy after we emerge from this downturn.
Fortunately, the fiscal policy response in the United States to the coronavirus shock has been both robust and timely. In four pieces of legislation passed in just over two months, the Congress has voted $2.9 trillion in coronavirus relief, about 14 percent of GDP. This total includes nearly $700 billion for the Paycheck Protection Program to support worker retention at small companies and more than $450 billion for the U.S. Treasury to provide first-loss equity funding for the Fed credit facilities that I discussed earlier. While the scale, scope, and timing of the monetary and fiscal policy responses to the coronavirus pandemic are unprecedented and will certainly cushion the blow the shock inflicts on the economy, the shock is severe. Depending on the course the virus takes and the depth and duration of the downturn it causes, additional support from both monetary and fiscal policies may be called for.
Concluding Remarks
The coronavirus pandemic poses the most serious threat to maximum employment and, potentially, to price stability that the United States has faced in our lifetimes. There is much that policymakers—and epidemiologists—simply do not know right now about the potential course that the virus, and thus the economy, will take. But there is one thing that I am certain about: The Federal Reserve will continue to act forcefully, proactively, and aggressively as we deploy our toolkit—including our balance sheet, forward guidance, and lending facilities—to provide critical support to the economy during this challenging time and to do all we can to make sure that the recovery from this downturn, once it commences, is as robust as possible.
1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Chiara Scotti of the Federal Reserve Board staff for her assistance in preparing this text.
Return to text
2. For additional information on the Federal Reserve actions taken at the March 15 FOMC meeting, see the meeting statement, which is available (along with statements from other FOMC meetings) on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm
.
Return to text
More details about the new credit facilities, the expansion of foreign exchange swap arrangements, and the FIMA Repo Facility, as well as other regulatory actions, can be found on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/covid-19.htm
.
3. See
Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. § 343 (1932)
, quoted text in paragraph 3.A.
Return to text
Related Video
Discussion with Vice Chair Clarida on the U.S Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy


Discurso 87
==================================================
May 13, 2020
Current Economic Issues
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
The coronavirus has left a devastating human and economic toll in its wake as it has spread around the globe. This is a worldwide public health crisis, and health-care workers have been the first responders, showing courage and determination and earning our lasting gratitude. So have the legions of other essential workers who put themselves at risk every day on our behalf.
As a nation, we have temporarily withdrawn from many kinds of economic and social activity to help slow the spread of the virus. Some sectors of the economy have been effectively closed since mid-March. People have put their lives and livelihoods on hold, making enormous sacrifices to protect not just their own health and that of their loved ones, but also their neighbors and the broader community. While we are all affected, the burden has fallen most heavily on those least able to bear it.
The scope and speed of this downturn are without modern precedent, significantly worse than any recession since World War II. We are seeing a severe decline in economic activity and in employment, and already the job gains of the past decade have been erased. Since the pandemic arrived in force just two months ago, more than 20 million people have lost their jobs. A Fed survey being released tomorrow reflects findings similar to many others: Among people who were working in February, almost 40 percent of those in households making less than $40,000 a year had lost a job in March.
1
This reversal of economic fortune has caused a level of pain that is hard to capture in words, as lives are upended amid great uncertainty about the future.
This downturn is different from those that came before it. Earlier in the post– World War II period, recessions were sometimes linked to a cycle of high inflation followed by Fed tightening.
2
The lower inflation levels of recent decades have brought a series of long expansions, often accompanied by the buildup of imbalances over time—asset prices that reached unsupportable levels, for instance, or important sectors of the economy, such as housing, that boomed unsustainably. The current downturn is unique in that it is attributable to the virus and the steps taken to limit its fallout. This time, high inflation was not a problem. There was no economy-threatening bubble to pop and no unsustainable boom to bust. The virus is the cause, not the usual suspects—something worth keeping in mind as we respond.
Today I will briefly discuss the measures taken so far to offset the economic effects of the virus, and the path ahead. Governments around the world have responded quickly with measures to support workers who have lost income and businesses that have either closed or seen a sharp drop in activity. The response here in the United States has been particularly swift and forceful.
To date, Congress has provided roughly $2.9 trillion in fiscal support for households, businesses, health-care providers, and state and local governments—about 14 percent of gross domestic product. While the coronavirus economic shock appears to be the largest on record, the fiscal response has also been the fastest and largest response for any postwar downturn.
At the Fed, we have also acted with unprecedented speed and force. After rapidly cutting the federal funds rate to close to zero, we took a wide array of additional measures to facilitate the flow of credit in the economy, which can be grouped into four areas. First, outright purchases of Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities to restore functionality in these critical markets. Second, liquidity and funding measures, including discount window measures, expanded swap lines with foreign central banks, and several facilities with Treasury backing to support smooth functioning in money markets. Third, with additional backing from the Treasury, facilities to more directly support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments. And fourth, temporary regulatory adjustments to encourage and allow banks to expand their balance sheets to support their household and business customers.
The Fed takes actions such as these only in extraordinary circumstances, like those we face today. For example, our authority to extend credit directly to private nonfinancial businesses and state and local governments exists only in "unusual and exigent circumstances" and with the consent of the Secretary of the Treasury. When this crisis is behind us, we will put these emergency tools away.
While the economic response has been both timely and appropriately large, it may not be the final chapter, given that the path ahead is both highly uncertain and subject to significant downside risks. Economic forecasts are uncertain in the best of times, and today the virus raises a new set of questions: How quickly and sustainably will it be brought under control? Can new outbreaks be avoided as social-distancing measures lapse? How long will it take for confidence to return and normal spending to resume? And what will be the scope and timing of new therapies, testing, or a vaccine? The answers to these questions will go a long way toward setting the timing and pace of the economic recovery. Since the answers are currently unknowable, policies will need to be ready to address a range of possible outcomes.
The overall policy response to date has provided a measure of relief and stability, and will provide some support to the recovery when it comes. But the coronavirus crisis raises longer-term concerns as well. The record shows that deeper and longer recessions can leave behind lasting damage to the productive capacity of the economy.
3
Avoidable household and business insolvencies can weigh on growth for years to come. Long stretches of unemployment can damage or end workers' careers as their skills lose value and professional networks dry up, and leave families in greater debt.
4
The loss of thousands of small- and medium-sized businesses across the country would destroy the life's work and family legacy of many business and community leaders and limit the strength of the recovery when it comes. These businesses are a principal source of job creation—something we will sorely need as people seek to return to work. A prolonged recession and weak recovery could also discourage business investment and expansion, further limiting the resurgence of jobs as well as the growth of capital stock and the pace of technological advancement. The result could be an extended period of low productivity growth and stagnant incomes.
We ought to do what we can to avoid these outcomes, and that may require additional policy measures. At the Fed, we will continue to use our tools to their fullest until the crisis has passed and the economic recovery is well under way. Recall that the Fed has lending powers, not spending powers. A loan from a Fed facility can provide a bridge across temporary interruptions to liquidity, and those loans will help many borrowers get through the current crisis. But the recovery may take some time to gather momentum, and the passage of time can turn liquidity problems into solvency problems. Additional fiscal support could be costly, but worth it if it helps avoid long-term economic damage and leaves us with a stronger recovery. This tradeoff is one for our elected representatives, who wield powers of taxation and spending.
Thank you. I look forward to our discussion.
References
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Lawrence H. Summers (1987). "Hysteresis in Unemployment,"
European Economic Review,
vol. 31 (February–March), pp. 288–95.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019),
Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2018 (PDF)
.
Washington: Board of Governors, May.
Davis, Steven J., and Till von Wachter (2011). "
Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss (PDF)
,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Fall, pp. 1–72.
Martin, Robert F., Teyanna Munyan, and Beth Anne Wilson (2014). "
Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves?
" IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 12.
——— (2015). "
Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves? (PDF)
" International Finance Discussion Papers 1145. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
Reifschneider, Dave, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2015). "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"
IMF Economic Review,
vol. 63 (May), pp. 71–109.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (1989). "
Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz (PDF)
," in Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989,
vol. 4. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 121–84.
1.
Board of Governors, 2019. Also see the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (forthcoming) and its
Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019, Featuring Supplemental Data from April 2020
(forthcoming).
Return to text
2.
Romer and Romer, 1989.
Return to text
3.
For example, see Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox, 2015; Blanchard and Summers, 1987; and Martin, Munyan, and Wilson, 2014, 2015.
Return to text
4.
Davis and Von Wachter, 2011.
Return to text


Discurso 88
==================================================
April 09, 2020
COVID-19 and the Economy
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Good morning. The challenge we face today is different in scope and character from those we have faced before. The coronavirus has spread quickly around the world, leaving a tragic and growing toll of illness and lost lives. This is first and foremost a public health crisis, and the most important response is coming from those on the front lines in hospitals, emergency services, and care facilities. We watch in collective awe and gratitude as these dedicated individuals put themselves at risk in service to others and to our nation.
Like other countries, we are taking forceful measures to control the spread of the virus. Businesses have shuttered, workers are staying home, and we have suspended many basic social interactions. People have been asked to put their lives and livelihoods on hold, at significant economic and personal cost. We are moving with alarming speed from 50-year lows in unemployment to what will likely be very high, although temporary, levels.
All of us are affected, but the burdens are falling most heavily on those least able to carry them. It is worth remembering that the measures we are taking to contain the virus represent an essential investment in our individual and collective health. As a society, we should do everything we can to provide relief to those who are suffering for the public good.
The recently passed Cares Act is an important step in honoring that commitment, providing $2.2 trillion in relief to those who have lost their jobs, to low- and middle-income households, to employers of all sizes, to hospitals and health-care providers, and to state and local governments. And there are reports of additional legislation in the works. The critical task of delivering financial support directly to those most affected falls to elected officials, who use their powers of taxation and spending to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources.
The Fed can also contribute in important ways: by providing a measure of relief and stability during this period of constrained economic activity, and by using our tools to ensure that the eventual recovery is as vigorous as possible.
To those ends, we have lowered interest rates to near zero in order to bring down borrowing costs. We have also committed to keeping rates at this low level until we are confident that the economy has weathered the storm and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
Even more importantly, we have acted to safeguard financial markets in order to provide stability to the financial system and support the flow of credit in the economy. As a result of the economic dislocations caused by the virus, some essential financial markets had begun to sink into dysfunction, and many channels that households, businesses, and state and local governments rely on for credit had simply stopped working. We acted forcefully to get our markets working again, and, as a result, market conditions have generally improved.
Many of the programs we are undertaking to support the flow of credit rely on emergency lending powers that are available only in very unusual circumstances—such as those we find ourselves in today—and only with the consent of the Secretary of the Treasury. We are deploying these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by the financial backing from Congress and the Treasury. We will continue to use these powers forcefully, proactively, and aggressively until we are confident that we are solidly on the road to recovery.
I would stress that these are
lending
powers, not
spending
powers. The Fed is not authorized to grant money to particular beneficiaries. The Fed can only make secured loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be fully repaid. In the situation we face today, many borrowers will benefit from these programs, as will the overall economy. But there will also be entities of various kinds that need direct fiscal support rather than a loan they would struggle to repay.
Our emergency measures are reserved for truly rare circumstances, such as those we face today. When the economy is well on its way back to recovery, and private markets and institutions are once again able to perform their vital functions of channeling credit and supporting economic growth, we will put these emergency tools away.
None of us has the luxury of choosing our challenges; fate and history provide them for us. Our job is to meet the tests we are presented. At the Fed, we are doing all we can to help shepherd the economy through this difficult time. When the spread of the virus is under control, businesses will reopen, and people will come back to work. There is every reason to believe that the economic rebound, when it comes, can be robust. We entered this turbulent period on a strong economic footing, and that should help support the recovery. In the meantime, we are using our tools to help build a bridge from the solid economic foundation on which we entered this crisis to a position of regained economic strength on the other side.
I want to close by thanking the millions on the front lines: those working in health care, sanitation, transportation, grocery stores, warehouses, deliveries, security—including our own team at the Federal Reserve—and countless others. Day after day, you have put yourselves in harm's way for others: to care for us, to ensure we have access to the things we need, and to help us through this difficult time.


Discurso 89
==================================================
February 25, 2020
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the 36th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C.
Share
Thank you for the opportunity to participate again this year in the Annual Economic Policy Conference of the National Association for Business Economics. I am really looking forward to this conversation. But first, I would like to share with you some thoughts about the outlook for the U.S. economy and monetary policy.
1
In its 11th year of a record expansion, the U.S. economy is in a good place. The labor market remains strong, economic activity is increasing at a moderate pace, and the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) baseline outlook is for a continuation of this performance in 2020.
2
At present, personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, price inflation is running somewhat below the Committee's 2 percent objective, but we project that, under appropriate monetary policy, inflation will rise gradually to our symmetric 2 percent objective. Although the unemployment rate is around a 50-year low, wages are rising broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation. We are not seeing any evidence to date that a strong labor market is putting excessive cost-push pressure on price inflation.
Although the fundamentals supporting household consumption remain solid, over 2019, sluggish growth abroad and global developments weighed on investment, exports, and manufacturing in the United States. Coming into this year, indications suggested that headwinds to global growth had begun to abate, and uncertainties around trade policy had diminished. However, risks to the outlook remain. In particular, we are closely monitoring the emergence of the coronavirus, which is likely to have a noticeable impact on Chinese growth, at least in the first quarter of this year. The disruption there could spill over to the rest of the global economy. But it is still too soon to even speculate about either the size or the persistence of these effects, or whether they will lead to a material change in the outlook. In addition, U.S. inflation remains muted. And inflation expectations—those measured by surveys, market prices, and econometric models—reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with our price-stability mandate.
Over the course of 2019, the FOMC undertook a shift in the stance of monetary policy to offset some significant global growth headwinds and global disinflationary pressures. I believe this shift was well timed and has been providing support to the economy and helping to keep the U.S. outlook on track. Monetary policy is in a good place and should continue to support sustained growth, a strong labor market, and inflation returning to our symmetric 2 percent objective. As long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with this outlook, the current stance of monetary policy likely will remain appropriate.
That said, monetary policy is not on a preset course. The Committee will proceed on a meeting-by-meeting basis and will be monitoring the effects of our recent policy actions along with other information bearing on the outlook as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. Of course, if developments emerge that, in the future, trigger a material reassessment of our outlook, we will respond accordingly.
In January 2019, my FOMC colleagues and I affirmed that we aim to operate with an ample level of bank reserves in the U.S. financial system.
3
And in October, we announced and began to implement a program to address pressures in repurchase agreement (repo) markets that became evident in September.
4
To that end, we have been purchasing Treasury bills and conducting both overnight and term repurchase operations. These efforts have been successful in achieving stable money market conditions, including over the year-end. As our bill purchases continue to build reserves toward levels that we associate with ample conditions, we intend to gradually transition away from the active use of repo operations. And as reserves reach durably ample levels, we intend to slow the pace of purchases such that our balance sheet grows in line with trend demand for our liabilities. Let me emphasize that we stand ready to adjust the details of this program as appropriate and in line with our goal, which is to keep the federal funds rate in the target range desired by the FOMC, and that these operations are technical measures not intended to change the stance of monetary policy.
Finally, allow me to offer a few words about the FOMC's review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that we commenced in 2019. This review—with public engagement unprecedented in scope for us—is the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve. Through 14
Fed Listens
events, including a research conference in Chicago, we have been hearing a range of perspectives not only from academic experts, but also from representatives of consumer, labor, community, business, and other groups. We are drawing on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability. In July, we began discussing topics associated with the review at regularly scheduled FOMC meetings. We will continue reporting on our discussions in the minutes of FOMC meetings and will share our conclusions with the public when we complete the review later this year.
5
Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward to the conversation and the question-and-answer session to follow.
1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.
Return to text
2. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is an addendum to the minutes of the December 2019 FOMC meeting. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 10–11, 2019
," press release, January 3.
Return to text
3. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130c.htm
. Also see the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190320c.htm
.
Return to text
4. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation, which can be found on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20191011a.htm
.
Return to text
5. Information about the review and the events associated with it is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm
.
Return to text


Discurso 90
==================================================
February 21, 2020
Financial Markets and Monetary Policy: Is There a Hall of Mirrors Problem?
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the 2020 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets  at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York
Share
Thank you to the conference organizers for inviting me here to discuss what former Chair Bernanke has famously referred to as a "hall of mirrors" problem: a situation in which a central bank's reaction function and financial market prices interact in economically suboptimal and potentially destabilizing ways.
1
In my remarks today, I will lay out the way I think about the interplay between financial markets and monetary policy, with a focus on how I myself seek to integrate noisy but often correlated signals about the economy that I glean from models, surveys, and financial markets.
2
Three Observations
I begin with three unobjectionable observations. First, because of Friedman's long and variable lags, monetary policy should be—and, at the Fed, is—forward looking. Policy decisions made today will have no effect on today's inflation or unemployment rates, so good policy needs to assess where the economic fundamentals are going tomorrow to calibrate appropriate policy today. Of course, financial markets are also forward looking. An asset's value today depends upon its expected future cash flows discounted by a rate that reflects the expected path of the policy rate plus an appropriate risk premium. Thus, central banks and financial markets are looking at the same data on macro fundamentals to make inferences about the future path of the economy, and, of course, any decisions on the policy path made by the central bank will influence asset prices through the discount factor. So optimal monetary policy will (almost) always be correlated with asset prices. Correlation is not evidence of causation, and the hall of mirrors problem at its essence is about inferring causation from correlation.
Second, because key variables that are crucial inputs for conducting monetary policy—such as r*, u*, and expected inflation, to name just three—are both unobserved and time varying, responsible monetary policy requires informed views about how these variables evolve over time as well as a humility and an appreciation for the uncertainties surrounding baseline views, however well informed they might be.
Third, when trying to make an inference about unobserved variables like r* or expected inflation, it is generally a good idea to seek data from multiple signals correlated with the variable of interest, so long as the signals themselves are not perfectly correlated with one another. Think of this third unobjectionable observation as a sort of "model averaging" or "triangulation" principle of robust inference in a noisy and complex environment.
3
Data Dependence
As I have written before, monetary policy needs to be—and, at the Fed, is— "data dependent" in two distinct ways.
4
Policy should be data dependent in the sense that incoming data indicate the
position
of the economy relative to the ultimate objectives of price stability and maximum employment. This information on where the economy is relative to the goals of monetary policy is an important input into standard interest rate feedback rules, such as those introduced by John Taylor in 1993 and ones that continue today to inform monetary policy decisions at the Fed and at other central banks.
5
Monetary policy, however, also needs to be data dependent in the second sense—that incoming data contain signals—that can enable the central bank to
update
its
estimates
of r* and u* in order to obtain its best estimate of the
destination
to which the economy is heading. As I mentioned a moment ago, a challenge for policymakers is that key variables that are essential inputs to monetary policy—such as u*, r*, and expected inflation—cannot be observed directly and must be inferred from observed data. And as is indicated in the Summary of Economic Projections, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants have, over the past seven years, repeatedly revised down their estimates of both u* and r* as unemployment fell and as real interest rates remained well below previous estimates of neutral without the rise in inflation those earlier estimates would have predicted. I would argue that these revisions to u* and r* indicate that the FOMC has been data dependent in this second sense and that these updated assessments of u* and r* have had an important influence on the path for the policy rate actually implemented in recent years. Indeed, had the Fed not been data dependent in this second sense and remained closed to the possibility that the economy had changed and historical estimates of r* and u* needed to be revised, that stubbornness would have represented a material policy mistake.
In addition to u* and r*, an important input into any monetary policy assessment is the state of inflation expectations. One of the robust messages from the DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) literature on optimal monetary policy is that, away from the effective lower bound, optimal monetary policy will not eliminate all inflation volatility—there are always shocks—but will, under rational expectations (RE), deliver average, and under RE, expected, inflation equal to the target. Since the late 1990s, inflation expectations appear to have been stable and well anchored in the neighborhood of our 2 percent goal. However, like r* and u*, inflation expectations are not directly observable and so must be inferred from data. But which data?
Financial Data and Monetary Policy
Let me now discuss in more detail how I use a form of model averaging to combine financial market data with data from surveys and econometric models to inform my thinking about the evolution of two key inputs to monetary policy: r* and long-run expected inflation. To be sure, financial market signals are noisy, and day-to-day movements in asset prices are unlikely to tell us much about the cyclical or structural position of the economy, let alone r* and expected inflation. However, persistent shifts in financial market conditions can be informative. Signals derived from financial market data, when combined with signals revealed from surveys of households and firms along with the filtered estimates from econometric models, can together provide valuable and reasonably robust foundations for real-time inference about the direction of travel in r* and expected inflation.
For example, a "straight read" of interest rate futures prices provides one source of high-frequency information about the destination for the federal funds rate expected by market participants. The destination for the federal funds rate implied by a straight read of futures prices is in turn the sum of the market-implied r* plus market-implied expected inflation. But these signals from interest rate futures are only a pure measure of the expected policy rate path under the assumption of a zero risk premium. For this reason, it is useful to compare policy rate paths derived from market prices with the path obtained from surveys of market participants, which, while subject to measurement error, should not be contaminated with a term premium. Market- and survey-based estimates of the policy rate path are often highly correlated. But when there is a divergence between the path or destination for the policy rate implied by the surveys and a straight read of interest rate derivatives prices, I place at least as much weight on the survey evidence—for example, derived from the surveys of primary dealers and market participants conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York—as I do on the estimates obtained from market prices. Finally, as another reality check, I, of course, always consult the latest estimate of r* produced by the Laubach and Williams (2003) unobservable components state-space model, which, I should point out, includes no information on asset prices other than the short-term nominal interest rate itself.
6
Quotes from the Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) market can provide valuable information about both r* and expected inflation. TIPS market data, together with nominal Treasury yields, can be used to construct measures of "breakeven inflation" or inflation compensation that provide a noisy signal of market expectations of future inflation. But, again, a straight read of breakeven inflation based on TIPS curve forward real rates needs to be augmented with a model to filter out the liquidity and risk premium components that place a wedge between inflation compensation and expected inflation.
It is again useful to compare estimates of expected inflation derived from breakeven inflation data with estimates of expected inflation obtained from surveys—for example, the expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers. Market- and survey-based estimates of expected inflation are correlated, but, again, when there is a divergence between the two, I place at least as much weight on the survey evidence as on the market-derived estimates. Again, here I also consult time-series models of underlying inflation, such as Stock and Watson (2007) and Cecchetti and others (2017), presented at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum in 2017.
7
At the Fed, the staff have estimated a state-space model decomposition of the common factor that drives a number of different measures of inflation expectations. State-space econometrics is one formal way to do model averaging. As I look at all of this evidence from market signals, surveys, and econometric models, I judge that inflation expectations reside at the low end of the range I consider consistent with our price-stability goal of 2 percent personal consumption expenditure inflation in the long run.
In both of the examples I have just discussed, the medium-frequency evolution of market-based, survey-based, and model-based estimates of r* and expected inflation have, over time, tended to move broadly together. When high-frequency market signals diverge from the survey- and model-based estimates, the potential benefit from increasing the weight on a signal derived from a forward-looking asset price versus backward estimates from models and slowly evolving surveys must be balanced against the cost of treating the noise in the asset price as a signal. There is no unique way to do this, and judgment is required.
In conclusion, while my colleagues and I are attuned to the potential for a hall of mirrors problem, in my experience this affliction is one the Federal Reserve guards against and does not suffer from. My colleagues and I do look at developments in asset markets, but never in isolation and always in the context of balancing asset market signals with complementary signals from surveys and econometric models. It is fair to say that when signals from all three sources line up in the same direction—as, for example, has been the case with market-, survey-, and model-based estimates of r*—the effect of those combined signals, at least on my thinking about the policy path, is more material than when the signals provide conflicting interpretations.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to hearing from the other panelists and to our discussion.
1. See Ben S. Bernanke (2004), "
What Policymakers Can Learn from Asset Prices
," speech delivered at the Investment Analysts Society of Chicago, Chicago, April 15.
Return to text
2. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I thank Dan Covitz and Eric Engstrom for their assistance in preparing these remarks.
Return to text
3. See Bruce Hansen (2007), "Least Squares Model Averaging,"
Econometrica
, vol. 75 (July), pp. 1175–89. On triangulation, see Robert Bogdan and Sari Knopp Biklen (2006),
Qualitative Research in Education: An Introduction to Theory and Methods,
5th ed. (Boston: Pearson Allyn & Bacon).
Return to text
4. See Richard H. Clarida (2018), "
Data Dependence and U.S. Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27.
Return to text
5. See John B. Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
vol. 39 (December), pp. 195–214.
Return to text
6. See Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003), "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063–70.
Return to text
7. See James H. Stock and and Mark W. Watson (2007), "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
, vol. 39 (s1, February), pp. 3–33; and Stephen G. Cecchetti, Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017),
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics
(PDF)
, report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.
Return to text


Discurso 91
==================================================
January 09, 2020
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics, Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York
Share
Thank you for the opportunity to join you bright and early on this January 2020 Thursday morning. As some of you may know, I am a longtime member of the Council on Foreign Relations and have attended and participated in many such events over the past 20 years, although I will point out that in my previous visits to the dais, I was in the somewhat less demanding position of asking the questions rather than answering them. I am really looking forward to this conversation, but I would like first to share with you some thoughts about the outlook for the U.S. economy and monetary policy.
1
The U.S. economy begins the year 2020 in a good place. The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, inflation is close to our 2 percent objective, gross domestic product growth is solid, and the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) baseline outlook is for a continuation of this performance in 2020.
2
At present, personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price inflation is running somewhat below our 2 percent objective, but we project that, under appropriate monetary policy, inflation will rise gradually to our symmetric 2 percent objective. Although the unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, wages are rising broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation. We are not seeing any evidence to date that a strong labor market is putting excessive cost-push pressure on price inflation.
Committee projections for the U.S. economy are similar to our projections at this time one year ago, but over the course of 2019, the FOMC shifted the stance of U.S. monetary policy to offset some significant global growth headwinds and global disinflationary pressures. In 2019, sluggish growth abroad and global developments weighed on investment, exports, and manufacturing in the United States, although there are some indications that headwinds to global growth may be beginning to abate. U.S. inflation remains muted. Over the 12 months through November, PCE inflation was running at 1.5 percent, and core PCE inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices and is a better measure of underlying inflation, was running at 1.6 percent. Moreover, inflation expectations, those measured by both surveys and market prices, have moved lower and reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with our price-stability mandate.
The shift in the stance of monetary policy that we undertook in 2019 was, I believe, well timed and has been providing support to the economy and helping to keep the U.S. outlook on track. I believe that monetary policy is in a good place and should continue to support sustained growth, a strong labor market, and inflation running close to our symmetric 2 percent objective. As long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with this outlook, the current stance of monetary policy likely will remain appropriate.
Looking ahead, monetary policy is not on a preset course. The Committee will proceed on a meeting-by-meeting basis and will be monitoring the effects of our recent policy actions along with other information bearing on the outlook as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. Of course, if developments emerge that, in the future, trigger a material reassessment of our outlook, we will respond accordingly.
In January 2019, my FOMC colleagues and I affirmed that we aim to operate with an ample level of bank reserves in the U.S. financial system.
3
And in October, we announced and began to implement a program to address pressures in repurchase agreement (repo) markets that became evident in September.
4
To that end, we have been purchasing Treasury bills and conducting both overnight and term repurchase operations, and these efforts were successful in relieving pressures in the repo markets over the year-end. As we enter 2020, let me emphasize that we stand ready to adjust the details of this program as appropriate and in line with our goal, which is to keep the federal funds rate in the target range desired by the FOMC. As the minutes of the December FOMC meeting suggest, it may be appropriate to gradually transition away from active repo operations this year as Treasury bill purchases supply a larger base of reserves, though some repo might be needed at least through April, when tax payments will sharply reduce reserve levels.
Finally, allow me to offer a few words about the FOMC review of the strategy, tools, and communication practices that we commenced in February 2019. This review—with public engagement unprecedented in scope for us—is the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve. Through 14
Fed Listens
events, including an academic conference in Chicago, we have been hearing a range of perspectives not only from academic experts, but also from representatives of consumer, labor, community, business, and other groups. We are drawing on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability. In July, we began discussing topics associated with the review at regularly scheduled FOMC meetings. We will continue reporting on our discussions in the minutes of FOMC meetings and will share our conclusions with the public when we conclude the review later this year.
5
Thank you very much for your time and attention. I look forward to the conversation and the question-and-answer session to follow.
1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.
Return to text
2. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is an addendum to the minutes of the December 2019 FOMC meeting. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 10–11, 2019
," press release, January 3.
Return to text
3. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130c.htm
. Also see the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190320c.htm
.
Return to text
4. See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation, which can be found on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20191011a.htm
.
Return to text
5. Information about the review and the events associated with it is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm
.
Return to text


Discurso 92
==================================================
November 25, 2019
Building on the Gains from the Long Expansion
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Annual Meeting of the Greater Providence Chamber of Commerce, Providence, Rhode Island
Share
Over the past year, my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) have been conducting a first-ever public review of how we make monetary policy. As part of that review, we held
Fed Listens
events around the country where representatives from a wide range of groups have been telling us how the economy is working for them and the people they represent and how the Federal Reserve might better promote the goals Congress has set for us: maximum employment and price stability. We have heard two messages loud and clear. First, as this expansion continues into its 11th year—the longest in U.S. history—economic conditions are generally good. Second, the benefits of the long expansion are only now reaching many communities, and there is plenty of room to build on the impressive gains achieved so far.
These themes show through in many ways in official statistics. For example, more than a decade of steady advances has pushed the jobless rate near a 50-year low, where it has remained for well over a year. But the wealth of middle-income families—savings, home equity, and other assets—has only recently surpassed levels seen before the Great Recession, and the wealth of people with lower incomes, while growing, has yet to fully recover.
1
Fortunately, the outlook for further progress is good: Forecasters are generally predicting continued growth, a strong job market, and inflation near 2 percent. Tonight I will begin by discussing the Fed's policy actions over the past year to support the favorable outlook. Then I will turn to two important opportunities for further gains from this expansion: maintaining a stable and reliable pace of 2 percent inflation and spreading the benefits of employment more widely.
Monetary Policy and the Economy in 2019
We started 2019 with a favorable outlook, and over the year the outlook has changed only modestly in the eyes of many forecasters (
figure 1
). For example, in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, the forecast for inflation is a bit lower, but the unemployment forecast is unchanged and the forecast for gross domestic product (GDP) is nearly unchanged.
2
The key to the ongoing favorable outlook is household spending, which represents about 70 percent of the economy and continues to be strong, supported by the healthy job market, rising incomes, and solid consumer confidence.
While events of the year have not much changed the outlook, the process of getting from there to here has been far from dull. I will describe how we grappled with incoming information and made important monetary policy changes through the year to help keep the favorable outlook on track.
As the year began, growth appeared robust, but the economy faced some risks flowing mainly from weakening global economic growth and trade developments. Foreign growth, which slipped in the second half of last year, slid further as 2019 progressed. While weaker foreign growth does not necessarily translate into similar weakness here, it does hurt our exporters and presents a risk that the weakness may spread more broadly. At the same time, business contacts around the country have been telling us that trade-related uncertainties are weighing on their decisions. These global developments have been holding back overall economic growth. Manufacturing output, which had only recently surpassed its level before the Great Recession, has declined this year and is again below its pre-recession peak. Business investment has also weakened.
In addition, inflation pressures proved unexpectedly muted this year. After remaining close to our symmetric 2 percent objective for much of last year, inflation is now running below 2 percent. Some of the softness in overall inflation is the result of a fall in oil prices and should not affect inflation going forward. But core inflation—which omits volatile food and energy prices—is also running somewhat below 2 percent.
The main themes of our deliberations this year have been a continuing favorable outlook founded on strength in the household sector, with a few yellow flags including muted inflation and weakness in manufacturing. In addition, global growth and trade have presented ongoing risks and uncertainties. We also faced some less prominent factors that always confront policymakers. Specifically, we never have a crystal clear real-time picture of how the economy is performing. In addition, the precise timing and size of the effects of our policy decisions cannot be known in real time.
In August, the Bureau of Labor Statistics previewed a likely revision to its count of payroll job creation for the 12 months ended March 2019. The preview indicated that job gains over that period were about half a million lower than previously reported. On a monthly basis, job gains were likely about 170,000 per month, rather than 210,000. While this news did not dramatically alter our outlook, it pointed to an economy with somewhat less momentum than we had thought.
3
Uncertainty about how our policies are affecting the economy also entered our discussions. As you know, we set our policy interest rate to achieve our goals of maximum employment and stable prices. In doing so, we often refer to certain benchmarks. One of these is the interest rate that would be neutral—neither restraining the economy nor pushing it upward. We call that rate "r*" (pronounced "r star"). A policy rate above r* would tend to restrain economic activity, while a setting below r* would tend to speed up the economy. A second benchmark is the natural rate of unemployment, which is the lowest rate of unemployment that would not create upward pressure on inflation. We call that rate "u*" (pronounced "u star"). You can think of r* and u* as two of the main stars by which we navigate. In an ideal world, policymakers could rely on these stars like mariners before the advent of GPS. But, unlike celestial stars on a clear night, we cannot directly observe these stars, and their values change in ways that are difficult to track in real time. Standard estimates of r* and u* made by policymakers and other analysts have been falling since 2012 (
figure 2
). Since the end of last year, incoming data—especially muted inflation data—prompted analysts inside and outside the Fed to again revise down their estimates of r* and u*.
4
Taken at face value, a lower r* would suggest that monetary policy is providing somewhat less support for employment and inflation than previously believed, and the fall in u* would suggest that the labor market was less tight than believed.
5
Both could help explain the weakness in inflation. As with the revised jobs data, these revised estimates of the stars were not a game changer for policy, but they provided another reason why a somewhat lower setting of our policy interest rate might be appropriate.
How did we add up all of these considerations? To help keep the U.S. economy strong in the face of global developments and to provide some insurance against ongoing risks, we progressively eased the stance of monetary policy over the course of the year. First, we signaled that increases in our short-term interest rate were unlikely. Then, from July to October, we reduced the target range for the federal funds rate by 3/4 percentage point. The full effects of these monetary policy actions will be felt over time, but we believe they are already helping to support consumer and business sentiment and boosting spending in interest-sensitive sectors, such as housing and consumer durable goods.
We see the current stance of monetary policy as likely to remain appropriate as long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with our outlook of moderate economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective. Looking ahead, we will be monitoring the effects of our policy actions, along with other information bearing on the outlook, as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. Of course, if developments emerge that cause a material reassessment of our outlook, we would respond accordingly. Policy is not on a preset course.
I will wrap up with two areas where we have an opportunity to build on our gains.
A Sustained Return of Inflation to 2 percent
For many years as the economy recovered from the Great Recession, inflation averaged around 1.5 percent—below our 2 percent objective (
figure 3
). We had long expected that inflation would gradually rise as the expansion continued, and, as I noted, both overall and core inflation ran at rates consistent with our goal for much of 2018. But this year, inflation is again running below 2 percent.
It is reasonable to ask why inflation running somewhat below 2 percent is a big deal. We have heard a lot about inflation at our
Fed Listens
events. People are concerned about the rising cost of medical care, of housing, and of college, but nobody seems to be complaining about overall inflation running below 2 percent. Even central bankers are not concerned about any particular minor fluctuation in inflation.
Around the world, however, we have seen that inflation running persistently below target can lead to an unhealthy dynamic in which inflation expectations drift down, pulling actual inflation further down. Lower inflation can, in turn, pull interest rates to ever-lower levels. The experience of Japan, and now the euro area, suggests that this dynamic is very difficult to reverse, and once under way, it can make it harder for a central bank to support its economy by further lowering interest rates. That is why it is essential that we at the Fed use our tools to make sure that we do not permit an unhealthy downward drift in inflation expectations and inflation. We are strongly committed to symmetrically and sustainably achieving our 2 percent inflation objective so that in making long-term plans, households and businesses can reasonably expect 2 percent inflation over time.
Spreading the Benefits of Employment
Many people at our
Fed Listens
events have told us that this long expansion is now benefiting low- and middle-income communities to a degree that has not been felt for many years. We have heard about companies, communities, and schools working together to help employees build skills—and of employers working creatively to structure jobs so that employees can do their jobs while coping with the demands of family and life beyond the workplace. We have heard that many people who in the past struggled to stay in the workforce are now working and adding new and better chapters to their lives. These stories show clearly in the job market data. Employment gains have been broad based across all racial and ethnic groups and all levels of educational attainment as well as among people with disabilities (
figure 4
).
The strong labor market is also encouraging more people in their prime working years—ages 25 to 54—to rejoin or remain in the labor force, meaning that they either have a job or are actively looking for one. This is a welcome development. For several decades up until the mid-1990s, the share of prime-age people in the labor force rose, as an influx of women more than offset some decline in male participation. In the mid-1990s, however, prime-age participation began to fall, and the drop-off became steeper in the Great Recession and the early years of the recovery (
figure 5
). Between 2007 and 2013, falling participation by both men and women contributed to a 2 percentage point overall decline. Our falling participation rate stands out among advanced economies. While the United States was roughly in the middle of the pack among 32 economies as of 1995, in 2018 we ranked near the bottom (
figure 6
). Fortunately, in the strong job market since 2014, prime-age participation has been staging a comeback. So far, we have made up more than half the loss in the Great Recession, which translates to almost 2 million more people in the labor force. But prime age participation could be still higher.
Income growth of low- and middle-income households has shown a pattern similar to that of participation, with two decades of disappointing news turning to better news during the past few years. According to Census data, inflation-adjusted incomes for the lowest 20 percent of households declined slightly over the two decades through 2014, and income for the middle 20 percent rose only modestly. Since then, incomes for these groups have risen more rapidly, as wage growth has picked up—and picked up most for the lower-paying jobs (
figure 7
).
Recent years' data paint a hopeful picture of more people in their prime years in the workforce and wages rising for low- and middle-income workers. But as the people at our
Fed Listens
events emphasized, this is just a start: There is still plenty of room for building on these gains. The Fed can play a role in this effort by steadfastly pursuing our goals of maximum employment and price stability. The research literature suggests a variety of policies, beyond the scope of monetary policy, that could spur further progress by better preparing people to meet the challenges of technological innovation and global competition and by supporting and rewarding labor force participation.
6
These policies could bring immense benefits both to the lives of workers and families directly affected and to the strength of the economy overall. Of course, the task of evaluating the costs and benefits of these policies falls to our elected representatives.
Conclusion
Monetary policy is now well positioned to support a strong labor market and return inflation decisively to our symmetric 2 percent objective. If the outlook changes materially, policy will change as well. At this point in the long expansion, I see the glass as much more than half full. With the right policies, we can fill it further, building on the gains so far and spreading the benefits more broadly to all Americans.
1. These wealth calculations are from the Federal Reserve's Distributional Financial Accounts (DFAs). For more details on the DFAs, see Michael Batty, Joseph Briggs, Karen Pence, Paul Smith, and Alice Volz (2019), "
The Distributional Financial Accounts
," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 30). To view or download the data, see the interactive visualization tool at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1/dataviz/dfa/index.html
.
Return to text
2. The projections of FOMC participants as reported in the Summary of Economic Projections show a similar change.
Return to text
3. The Fed's real-time assessment of job growth this year is discussed in Jerome H. Powell (2019), "
Data-Dependent Monetary Policy in an Evolving Economy
," speech delivered
at "Trucks and Terabytes: Integrating the 'Old' and 'New' Economies," the 61st Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Denver, Colorado, October 8.
Return to text
4. Averaging across the estimates in figure 2, the estimates of r* are down 0.3 percentage point and those of u* are down 0.2 percentage point.
Return to text
5. Taken literally, the revised estimates of the stars would, by standard rules of thumb, call for a somewhat lower federal funds rate. For example, using the Taylor (1993) rule and using Okun's law to state the rule in terms of the unemployment gap with a coefficient of 1 instead of the output gap with a coefficient of 0.5, the shift in r* and u* would call for a 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate. John B. Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,"
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
vol. 39 (December) (New York: Elsevier), pp. 195–214.
Return to text
6. Francesco Grigoli, Zsóka Kóczán, and Petia Topalova (2018), "
Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects (PDF)
," chapter 2 in International Monetary Fund,
World Economic Outlook
(Washington: IMF, April), pp. 1–58.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 93
==================================================
November 14, 2019
The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At "Fed Policy:  A Shadow Review" Cato Institute’s 37th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, D.C.
Share
Watch Live
I am delighted to be at the Cato Institute today to participate in your annual monetary conference. The last time I had the privilege of speaking at this conference was in 2004. This year's conference, "Fed Policy: A Shadow Review," takes up the Federal Reserve's 2019 review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. This topic is, of course, timely and one to which I and others have devoted much thought over the past year.
1
Motivation for the Review
Although I will have more to say about the review in a moment, let me state at the outset that we believe our existing framework, which has been in place since 2012, has served us well and has enabled us to achieve and sustain our statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability. However, we also believe now is a good time to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we can refine our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and maintain our goals as consistently and robustly as possible.
2
With the U.S. economy operating at or close to maximum employment and price stability, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review. The unemployment rate is near a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective. With this review, we hope to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years.
The U.S. and foreign economies have changed in some important ways since the Global Financial Crisis. Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States.
3
A fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will hit its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns. That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support spending and employment and to keep inflation from falling too far below the central bank's objective—2 percent in the case of the Federal Reserve.
4
Another key development in recent decades is that price inflation appears less responsive to resource slack. That is, the short-run price Phillips curve—if not the wage Phillips curve—appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.
5
A flatter Phillips curve permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.
6
However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of lost economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations. Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.
7
Based on the evidence I have reviewed, I judge that U.S. inflation expectations today do reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with our price‑stability mandate.
A Robust U.S. Labor Market
For some time now, price stability in the United States has coincided with a historically low unemployment rate. This low unemployment rate, 3.6 percent in October, has been interpreted by many as suggesting that the labor market is currently operating beyond full employment. However, we cannot directly observe the level of the unemployment rate that is consistent with full employment and price stability, u*, but must infer it from data via models. I myself believe that the range of plausible estimates of u* extends to 4 percent and below and includes the current unemployment rate of 3.6 percent. As the unemployment rate has declined in recent years, labor force participation for people in their prime working years has increased significantly, with the October participation rate at a cycle high of 82.8 percent.
8
Increased prime-age participation has provided employers with additional labor resources and has been one factor, along with a pickup in labor productivity, restraining inflationary pressures. Whether participation will continue to increase in a tight labor market remains to be seen. But I note that male prime-age participation still remains below levels seen in previous business cycle expansions.
Also, although the labor market is robust, there is no evidence that rising wages are putting excessive upward pressure on price inflation. Wages today are increasing broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation. Also of note, and receiving less attention than it deserves, is the material increase in labor's share of national income that has occurred in recent years as the labor market has tightened. As I have written before, labor's share tends to rise as expansions endure and the labor market tightens.
9
In recent cycles—and thus far in this cycle—this rise in labor's share has not put excessive upward pressure on price inflation.
Scope of the Review
The Federal Reserve Act instructs the Fed to conduct monetary policy "so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."
10
Our review this year takes this statutory mandate as given and also takes as given that inflation at a rate of 2 percent is most consistent over the longer run with the congressional mandate.
Our existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
11
First adopted in January 2012, the statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level. In doing so, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) recognizes that these assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision.
As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy framework known as "flexible inflation targeting."
12
However, the Fed's mandate is much more explicit about the role of employment than that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedence over the other.
The review of our current framework is wide ranging, and we are not prejudging where it will take us, but events of the past decade highlight three broad questions that we will seek to answer with our review.
Three Questions
The first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?"
Under our current approach as well as the approaches of many central banks around the world, persistent inflation shortfalls of the target are treated as "bygones." Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots, but the ELB on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more of a challenge. Persistent inflation shortfalls
carry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become anchored below the stated inflation goal.
13
In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated "makeup" strategies under which policymakers seek to undo past inflation deviations from target. These strategies include targeting average inflation and price-level targeting, in which policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path.
14
Other makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case.
15
In many models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average performance on both legs of the dual mandate.
16
The success of makeup strategies relies on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes—for example, that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent. As is well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at that time will not justify that action. Thus, one of the most important questions we seek to answer in our review is whether the Fed could, in practice, attain the benefits of makeup strategies that are possible in theoretical models.
The next question the review is considering is, "Are existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? And, if so, how?" The FOMC's primary monetary policy tool is its target range for the federal funds rate. In December 2008, the FOMC cut that target to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions. Because the U.S. economy required additional support after the ELB was reached, the FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis: balance sheet policies and forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.
17
In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, the review is examining additional tools for easing policy when the ELB is binding. During the crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve considered some of the tools deployed by other central banks but ultimately found them wanting in the U.S. context. But the review is reassessing the case for these and other tools in light of more recent experience in other countries.
The third question the review is considering is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?" Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting. Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication both to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions and to foster democratic accountability. These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about the principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy following the financial crisis; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.
18
As part of the review, we are assessing the Committee's current and past communications and additional forms of communication that could be helpful. For example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability.
Activities and Timeline for the Review
Let me turn now to our review process itself.
19
An important piece of this review has been a series of 14
Fed Listens
events, hosted by the Board and the Reserve Banks from late February until mid-October. We heard from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development professionals, and academics. At a research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago in early June, we heard from prominent academic economists as well as national and community leaders. Our
Fed Listens
events have provided us with a valuable perspective on the labor market that could not otherwise be gleaned from aggregate statistics; these events have also offered insights into how the monetary levers we pull and push affect communities, credit availability, and small businesses.
Last summer, the FOMC began to assess what we have learned at the
Fed Listens
events and to receive briefings from System staff on topics relevant to the review.
20
At our July meeting, FOMC participants agreed that our current framework for monetary policy has served the Committee and the U.S. economy well over the past decade. FOMC participants noted that the Committee's experience with forward guidance and asset purchases has improved its understanding of how these tools operate. As a result, the Committee could proceed more confidently in using these tools in the future if economic circumstances warranted. However, overall, we judged that forward guidance and balance sheet tools, while helpful, did not eliminate the risk of returning to the ELB.
At our September meeting, we discussed makeup strategies in the context of a lower neutral policy interest rate, a reduction in conventional policy space, and a higher likelihood that future economic downturns will involve a return to the ELB. We generally agreed that our current monetary policy framework is flexible enough to allow the Committee to choose the policy actions that best support our dual-mandate objectives in a wide variety of economic circumstances.
Our discussions will continue at future meetings. In particular, we have not yet begun to consider potential changes to communication practices, including the Committee's consensus Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. The statement has helped articulate and clarify the Federal Reserve's approach to monetary policy, and we have agreed that any changes we might make to our strategy would likely call for some modification of this consensus statement.
We will continue to report on our discussions in the minutes of our meetings and share our conclusions when we finish the review, likely around the middle of next year.
Concluding Thoughts
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges. So it makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate findings. What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today.
Thank you very much for your time and attention. I trust that today's conference will provide stimulating discussion of issues that are central to our review.
References
Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 54 (April), pp. 728–52.
Bank for International Settlements (2017).
87th Annual Report.
(PDF)
Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June.
Berg, Claes, and Lars Jonung (1999). "Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 1931–1937,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 43 (June), pp. 525–51.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2007).
"Federal Reserve Communications,"
speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.
——— (2017).
"Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy,"
Ben Bernanke's Blog,
October 12.
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015).
"Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications," (PDF)
IMF Working Paper WP/5/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018).
Monetary Policy Report.
Washington: Board of Governors, July.
——— (2019).
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019,"
press release, August 21.
Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006). "Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?"
Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 88 (August), pp. 445–62.
Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010). "How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.,
Handbook of Monetary Economics
, vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 369–422.
Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (2018).
"The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy," (PDF)
Occasional Paper Series 217. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, December.
Bullard, James (2018).
"The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve," (PDF)
speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017).
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics,
(PDF)
report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.
Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019).
"Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit," (PDF)
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Clarida, Richard H. (2016). "Good News for the Fed,"
International Economy
, Spring, pp. 44–45 and 75–76.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 115 (February), pp. 147–80.
Clinton, Kevin, Charles Freedman, Michel Juillard, Ondra Kamenik, Douglas Laxton, and Hou Wang (2015).
"Inflation-Forecast Targeting: Applying the Principle of Transparency," (PDF)
IMF Working Paper WP/15/132. Washington: International Monetary Fund, June.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003).
"The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,"(PDF)
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
no. 1, pp. 139–235.
English, William B., David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions,"
IMF Economic Review,
vol. 63 (May), pp. 22–70.
Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018).
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy," (PDF)
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds.,
Handbook of Economic Forecasting,
vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2–56.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018).
"Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?" (PDF)
paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14.
Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018).
"From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting," (PDF)
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
Hills, Timothy S., Taisuke Nakata, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016).
"The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound," (PDF)
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"
Journal of International Economics,
vol. 108, Supplement 1 (May), pp. S59–75.
Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017).
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," (PDF)
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Spring, pp. 317–96.
King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014). "Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate," NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February.
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007).
"Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate,"
speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10.
Nakov, Anton (2008).
"Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate," (PDF)
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 4 (June), pp. 73–127.
Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005). "Average Inflation Targeting,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
, vol. 37 (October), pp. 837–63.
Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017).
"Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay?" (PDF)
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 13 (September), pp. 1–42.
Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66.
Roberts, John M. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,"
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 2 (September), pp. 193–230.
Romer, David (2010). "A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 42 (August), pp. 951–57.
Ruge-Murcia, Francisco (2014).
"Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price Level?" (PDF)
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 10 (June), pp. 301–26.
Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013).
"The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping?" (PDF)
in
World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.
Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 79–95.
Swanson, Eric T. (2018). "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October.
Yellen, Janet (2015).
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,"
speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
——— (2017).
"The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy,"
speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19.
1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
2. Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework. They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.
Return to text
3. For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).
Return to text
4. For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).
Return to text
5. For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).
Return to text
6. One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010). As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions. Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.
Return to text
7. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation. Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s. These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.
Return to text
8. The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018
Monetary Policy Report
contains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018, pp. 8–10).
Return to text
9. See Clarida (2016).
Return to text
10. Even though the act lists three distinct goals, the Federal Reserve's mandate for monetary policy is commonly known as the "dual mandate." The reason is that an economy in which people who want to work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly quickly and in which the price level (meaning a broad measure of the price of goods and services purchased by consumers) is stable creates the conditions needed for interest rates to settle at moderate levels. For a discussion, see Mishkin (2007). Quoted text from the
Federal Reserve Act
is in 12 U.S.C. § 225a (2000).
Return to text
11. The statement is available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf
.
Return to text
12. For a discussion of this terminology and references, see English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) and Clinton and others (2015).
Return to text
13. These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB. For related discussions, see Reifschneider and Williams (2000); Adam and Billi (2007); Nakov (2008); and Hills, Nakata, and Schmidt (2016).
Return to text
14. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion. Nessén and Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting. There is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations. Central banks that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon—typically a couple of years ahead or over the "medium run"—without regard to past inflation deviations. One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of "2–3 per cent, on average, over the medium term" and thus might embed some notion of history dependence. However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation goal. The only known historical example of price-level targeting occurred in Sweden from 1931 to 1933 when the country abandoned the gold standard and attempted instead to maintain its price level. The temporary adoption of price-level targeting is credited with helping Sweden avoid deflation, an outcome that contrasted with that in countries that stayed on the gold standard. See Berg and Jonung (1999).
See Bernanke (2017) for a discussion of a temporary price-level targeting strategy. See Hebden and López-Salido (2018) for a quantitative assessment of that and other strategies. See also Kiley and Roberts (2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns.
Return to text
15. See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy rate lower than otherwise. The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the Board's July 2018
Monetary Policy Report
contains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018, pp. 37–41).
Return to text
16. See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S. economy.
Return to text
17. As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017). In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase household and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery. These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.
Return to text
18. Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannual
Monetary Policy Report.
With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon. Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members. For a discussion and data, see Bernanke (2007) and Romer (2010).
Return to text
19. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm
.
Return to text
20. See Board of Governors (2019).
Return to text


Discurso 94
==================================================
November 12, 2019
Monetary Policy, Price Stability, and Equilibrium Bond Yields: Success and Consequences
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the High-Level Conference on Global Risk, Uncertainty, And Volatility, co-sponsored by the Bank for International Settlements, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, Switzerland
Share
Watch Live
Good morning. I am honored and delighted to participate in this second annual conference on global risk, uncertainty, and volatility, cosponsored by the Federal Reserve Board, the Bank for International Settlements, and the Swiss National Bank.
1
I would like especially to thank the Swiss National Bank for hosting this event. This conference is part of continuing work across all of our institutions and the academic community to better quantify and assess the implications of risk and uncertainty. I am pleased that this year the focus of the conference is on two of my long-standing professional interests—financial markets and monetary policy. And my remarks today will not stray far from those interests. In particular, I would like to address an issue that has been much in focus—the decline in long-term interest rates—highlighting the role of monetary policy in contributing to that decline and the implications of that decline for the conduct of monetary policy.
The Decline in Long-Term Interest Rates and the Role of Monetary Policy
One of the most remarkable and fundamental changes in the global financial landscape over the past three decades has been the steady and significant decline in global sovereign bond yields. From the late 1980s, when 10-year nominal Treasury yields in the United States and sovereign rates in many other major advanced economies were around 10 percent, global bond yields in the advanced economies have trended lower to levels below 2 percent today (
figure 1
, "Bond Yields").
To understand and interpret this decline, it is useful to think of the yield on a nominal 10-year bond as the sum of two components: investors' expectation over the next 10 years of the average level of short-term interest rates plus a term premium. The term premium is the additional compensation—relative to investing in and rolling over short-maturity bills—that bondholders require for assuming the risk of holding a long-duration asset with greater exposure to interest rate and inflation volatility. Importantly, according to economic theory the equilibrium term premium can be negative. In this case, which is relevant today in the United States and some other countries, the exposure to interest rate and inflation volatility embedded in a long-maturity bond is more than offset by the potential value of the bond in hedging other risks, such as equity risk.
2
The expectation of the average level of future short-term interest rates can, in turn, be decomposed into the expectation of average future real interest rates and the expectation of average future inflation rates. Performing this standard decomposition reveals that the decline in long-term rates reflects declines in all three components: expected real rates, expected inflation, and the term premium (
figure 2
, "Yield Decomposition"). I will now discuss each of these components in turn.
With respect to expected real short-term interest rates, one reason investors expect lower future short-term interest rates is that neutral interest rates appear to have declined worldwide and are expected to remain low. This concept of a neutral level for short-term real interest rates is referred to in the academic literature as r* and corresponds to the rate consistent with a level of aggregate demand equal to and growing in pace with aggregate supply at an unchanged rate of inflation. Longer-run secular trends in r* largely, or even entirely, reflect fundamental "real" factors that are outside the control of a central bank. Policymakers and academics alike, including myself, have spent considerable time exploring the reasons for and ramifications of the decline in r* across countries.
3
For example, many have pointed to slowing population growth and a moderation in the pace of technological change as consistent with a lower level of r*.
4
Changes in risk tolerance and regulations have led to an increase in savings and in the demand for safe assets, pushing down yields on sovereign bonds.
5
Importantly, economic theory suggests and empirical research confirms that there is a significant common global component embedded in individual country r*s (
figure 3
, "Estimates of r*").
6
This common factor driving individual country r*s not only reflects the influence of common global shocks affecting all economies in a similar way (for example, a slowdown in global productivity and the demographics associated with aging), but also results from international capital flows that respond to and, over time, tend to narrow divergences in rates of return offered across different countries. Other things being equal, a decline in the common factor driving individual country r*s that is evident in the data would be expected to produce a comparable common decline in global bond yields.
In addition to the decline in r* around the world, lower long-term bond yields also reflect the influence of the initial downshift and ultimate anchoring of inflation expectations in many countries after the mid-1990s. Unlike the decline in r*, which primarily reflects fundamental "real" factors that are outside the control of a central bank, the decline and ultimate anchoring of inflation and inflation expectations in both major and many emerging economies were the direct consequence of the widespread adoption and commitment to transparent, flexible inflation-targeting monetary policy strategies. For example, in the United States, after the collapse of Bretton Woods, inflation spiraled upward, hitting double-digit rates in the 1970s and early 1980s. But by the mid-1980s, the back of inflation had been broken (thank you, Paul Volcker), and total personal consumption expenditure (PCE) inflation averaged less than 4 percent from 1985 to 1990. Following the 1990–91 recession, inflation fell further, and, by the mid-1990s, the conditions for price stability in the United States had been achieved (thank you, Alan Greenspan). From the mid-1990s until the Great Recession, U.S. PCE inflation averaged about 2 percent. And, of course, this step-down in inflation has been global, with the other major advanced economies experiencing a similar shift down (
table 1
, "Average Inflation Rates"). Many major emerging market economies as well have seen a remarkable and very welcome decline in average inflation rates as a result of adopting and delivering on credible inflation-targeting polices. To the extent that the step-down in inflation is expected to persist, which appears to be the case, long-term yields have reflected this decline one-for-one.
However, not only has the average level of inflation fallen, but inflation has also become more stable. After considerable volatility in the 1970s and 1980s, over the past few decades, inflation—especially core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices—has, with rare exceptions, moved only within a relatively narrow range in many countries despite significant swings in the prices of oil and other commodities, recessions, the Global Financial Crisis, and unprecedented monetary policy actions. Reflecting this, inflation volatility, as measured by the standard deviation in quarterly inflation rates, has declined. (See
table 2
, "Standard Deviation of Annualized Quarterly Headline Inflation Rates.")
What has been behind this global decline in inflation volatility? I would argue, as have many others, that monetary policy played a key role in reducing not only the average rate of inflation, but also the volatility of inflation.
7
Inflation-targeting monetary policy can plausibly influence the variance of inflation through several channels. For example, in a textbook DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) model (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (CGG), 1999) featuring a central bank that implements policy via a Taylor-type rule, the equilibrium variance of inflation will be lower the more aggressively the central bank leans against exogenous shocks that push inflation away from target. So even if the variance of inflation shocks is constant, the variance of inflation itself will be an endogenous function of monetary policy. Another related channel through which monetary policy can influence the variance of inflation is by changing the equilibrium
persistence
of inflation deviations from target. In the textbook CGG model (1999), augmented with a hybrid Phillips curve that features an inertial backward-looking component, the equilibrium persistence of inflation is an endogenous function of the monetary policy rule such that the more aggressively the central bank leans against exogenous shocks that push inflation away from target, the less persistent are inflation deviations from target in equilibrium. In the simple case in which equilibrium inflation is a first-order autoregressive process (as it is in the CGG (1999) model under optimal policy), the equilibrium unconditional variance of inflation is monotonic in inflation persistence for any given constant variance of inflation shocks. Of course, non-monetary factors may also have contributed to a lower variance of inflation. For example, the variance of underlying exogenous shocks to aggregate supply and demand may have fortuitously and coincidentally fallen in tandem with the adoption of inflation targeting in many countries.
I will now turn to a third factor behind the decline in global bond yields, the decline in term premiums that is estimated to have occurred in many countries over the past 20 years. Most studies find that term premiums have fallen substantially in major economies over the past 20 years, and that in the United States term premiums may have been negative for some time. Decomposing the factors that drive equilibrium term premiums is an active area of academic research, and I will not attempt to summarize or synthesize this vast literature.
8
But I would like to emphasize what seems to me to be three contributors to the decline in the term premium in the United States and perhaps in other countries as well.
9
First, the decline in inflation volatility has almost certainly been important in driving the term premium on nominal bonds lower. The real ex-post payoff from holding a nominal bond to maturity is directly exposed to price-level risk, and thus, all else being equal, a decline in inflation volatility makes the real purchasing power of the bond's payoff less risky. Through this channel, the decline in inflation volatility should be reflected in a smaller inflation risk premium in nominal bond yields, which is exactly what is estimated in the Kim, Walsh, and Wei (2019) yield curve model (
figure 4
, "Term Premium Decomposition"). Indeed, this yield curve model attributes around 100 basis points of the decline in the U.S. 10-year nominal term premium since the early 1990s to a decline in the inflation risk premium.
A second likely contributor to the decline in the U.S. term premium over the past decade is the Federal Reserve's substantial purchases of long-duration Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities in three large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs and one maturity extension program between late 2008 and late 2014. These purchases, which were concentrated at the longer end of the U.S. yield curve, took duration out of the market and thus lowered the equilibrium yield required by investors to hold the reduced supply of long-duration assets instead of holding and rolling over short-maturity Treasury bills. Estimates of the cumulative effect of these purchases on the U.S. term premium span a wide range, with some estimates above 100 basis points.
10
Moreover, the global market for sovereign bonds and currency-hedged duration is tightly integrated, and it seems likely that asset purchase programs in other major economies, such as Japan, the euro area, and the United Kingdom, have contributed as well to reducing the term premium in Treasury securities (and, of course, LSAP programs in the United States likely contributed to lower term premiums abroad).
A third contributor to a lower U.S. term premium is much less widely appreciated than lower inflation volatility and LSAPs. This reflects the value that bonds have provided over the past 20 years as a hedge against equity risk. As documented by Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (CSV) (2017) and Campbell, Pflueger, and Viceira (CPV) (forthcoming), the empirical correlation between U.S. bond and stock
returns
changed sign in the late 1990s from positive to negative (
figure 5
, "Bond–Stock Covariance in the United States"). In the 1970s and 1980s, the sign of the correlation was positive, which implies that bond and stock returns tended to rise and fall together. In this period, bonds provided a diversification benefit when added to an equity portfolio (the bond return beta to stocks averaged 0.2) but not a hedge against equity risk. Since the late 1990s, the empirical correlation between bond and stock returns has typically been negative (the bond return beta to stocks has averaged negative 0.2). This means that since the late 1990s, bond returns tend to be high and positive when stock returns are low and negative so that nominal bonds have been a valuable outright hedge against equity risk. As such, we would expect the equilibrium yield on bonds to be lower than otherwise, as investors should bid up their price to reflect their value as a hedge against equity risk (relative to their value when the bond beta to stocks was positive). According to CSV, the hedging value of nominal bonds with a negative beta to stocks could substantially lower the equilibrium term premium on bonds. Quoting from their paper (page 265),
"Thus from peak to trough, the realized beta of Treasury bonds has declined by about 0.6 and has changed sign. According to the CAPM [capital asset pricing model], this would imply that term premia on 10-year zero-coupon Treasuries should have declined by 60 percent of the equity premium."
11
As a concrete example, consider the (ex-post) hedging value of bonds for equity risk in the Global Financial Crisis. In 2008, the total return on the S&P 500 index was around minus 37 percent, while the total return of the on-the-run 30-year Treasury bond was about 38 percent!
There is likely no single explanation for the change in sign of the correlation between equilibrium bond and stock returns in the United States and in other major countries (
figure 6
, "Bond–Stock Covariances in Advanced Economies").
12
One recent paper that does rigorously model the changing value of bonds for hedging equity risk is by CPV. This paper develops and estimates a habit persistence consumption asset pricing model in which the sign of the equilibrium covariance between equity and bond returns depends on the reduced-form correlation between inflation and the output gap, the correlation between the federal funds rate and the output gap, as well as the equilibrium persistence of inflation. CPV document in U.S. data, for a sample spanning 1979:Q3 to 2011:Q4, that (1) the correlation between inflation and the output gap changed sign from negative to positive; that (2) the correlation between the federal funds rate and the output gap changed sign, also from negative to positive; and that (3) the evidence of the sign change becomes statistically significant beginning in the late 1990s. CPV also document that the transitory component of inflation becomes much less persistent after the estimated break in their sample.
The CPV paper is agnostic as to why the reduced-form correlation between inflation and the output gap and that between the federal funds rate and the output gap both change sign in their sample, but the authors do demonstrate that in their asset pricing model, these reduced-form sign changes are sufficient to generate the sign change in the correlation between equity and bond returns that we observe in the data.
I, myself, believe that the change in the U.S. monetary policy regime that began in 1979 under Paul Volcker and that was extended by Alan Greenspan in the 1990s very likely contributed to the change in the sign of the correlation between inflation and the output gap as well as the change in sign of the correlation between the federal funds rate and the output gap that we observe in the data (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, 2000). These are the sorts of patterns that a simple model of optimal monetary policy would produce when starting from an initial condition in which inflation is well above the (implicit) target, as was the case in 1979. High initial inflation triggers a policy response for the central bank to push up the real policy rate well above inflation in order to push output below potential, which, via the Phillips curve, will, over time, lower inflation toward the target. If this policy succeeds ex post, inflation expectations become anchored at the new lower level of inflation, and policy can, then, respond to demand shocks by adjusting real rates pro-cyclically, the opposite of what is required when initial inflation is too high and inflation expectations are not anchored.
13
Inflation will also be pro-cyclical with well-anchored inflation expectations if demand shocks dominate and inflation expectations remain anchored.
Implications for Monetary Policy: The Federal Reserve's Framework Review
By lowering expected inflation, by anchoring expected inflation at a low level, by contributing to a reduction in the volatility of inflation—and thus a reduction in the inflation risk premium—and by contributing to creating a hedging value of long-duration sovereign bonds, inflation-targeting monetary policy has lowered equilibrium bond yields relative to equilibrium short rates substantially compared with the experience of the 1970s and early 1980s. But, as I noted earlier, during the past decade equilibrium short rates have themselves also fallen substantially. These two phenomena, taken together, have resulted in sovereign bond yields that are substantially lower than the pre-crisis experience and thus substantially closer to the effective lower bound for the policy rate than they were before the crisis. But what does this mean for monetary policy? At its most basic level, the answer to this question could depend on how far the nominal policy rate is from the effective lower bound (ELB) and the extent to which the term premium on long-duration bonds can become even more negative than it is at present (at least in the United States).
14
While I do not have a precise answer to this question, I will confess that I think it highly unlikely in the next downturn, whenever it is, that 10-year U.S. Treasury yields will fall by the roughly 390 basis points that we observed between June 2007 and July 2016 (the bottom in Treasury yields in this cycle) or even decline by the roughly 360 basis points that we observed between January 2000 and June 2003.
The reality of low neutral rates and equilibrium bond yields has motivated us at the Federal Reserve to take a hard look this year at our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. While we believe our existing framework, in place since 2012, has served us well, we believe now is a good time to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we can refine our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and maintain our goals as consistently and robustly as possible in the world we live in today.
15
As I have noted before, the review of our current framework is wide ranging, and we are not prejudging where it will take us, but events of the past decade highlight three broad questions that we will seek to answer with our review.
The first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?" Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots. But persistent inflation shortfalls, such as those associated with the ELB, carry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become anchored below the stated inflation goal.
16
At our September Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, we discussed options for mitigating ELB risks, including "makeup" strategies in which policymakers would promise to make up for past inflation shortfalls with a sustained accommodative stance of policy intended to generate higher future inflation.
17
Such strategies provide accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate low for an extended period. Makeup strategies may also help anchor inflation expectations more firmly at 2 percent than would a policy strategy that does not compensate for past inflation misses. But the benefits of makeup strategies depend importantly on the private sector's understanding of them as well as the belief that future policymakers will follow through on promises to keep policy accommodative. An advantage of our current framework over makeup approaches is that it has provided the Committee with the flexibility to assess a broad range of factors and information in choosing its policy actions, and these actions can vary depending on economic circumstances in order to best achieve our dual-mandate goals.
We are also considering whether our existing monetary policy tools are adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or whether our toolkit should be expanded and, if so, how. Because the U.S. economy required additional support after the ELB was reached in 2008, the FOMC deployed two additional tools beyond changes to the target for the federal funds rate: balance sheet policies and forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.
18
The review is examining the efficacy of these existing tools, as well as additional tools for easing policy when the ELB is binding, in light of the more recent experiences of other economies.
Finally, we are focusing on how the FOMC can improve the communication of its policy framework and actions. Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting.
19
As part of the review, we are assessing the Committee's current and past communications and additional forms of communication that could be helpful.
In terms of process, we have heard from a broad range of interested individuals and groups in 14
Fed Listens
events this year. At our July 2019 FOMC meeting, the Committee began to assess what we have learned from these events and to receive briefings from System staff on topics relevant to the review.
20
But we still have much to discuss at upcoming meetings. We will share our findings with the public when we have completed our review, likely during the first half of 2020.
Concluding Remarks
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new opportunities and challenges. One of these challenges is how best to conduct monetary policy in the new world of low equilibrium interest rates. It makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate findings. What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today.
Stepping back, earlier today, speakers at this conference discussed the challenges of making monetary policy in an uncertain and risky environment. In my remarks, I have laid out an important example of the interaction of the macroeconomy, monetary policy, and the market response to risk. The papers you are about to discuss throughout the next two days present cutting-edge research on the effect and measurement of risk and uncertainty and volatility, with a special focus on monetary policy and market behavior. As someone on the front lines, I look forward to learning from your insights and encourage your rich discussion over the next few days and your continued work on how to make my job easier! Thank you, and good luck!
References
Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates,"
Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 54 (April), pp. 728–52.
Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich (2013). "A Long-Run Risks Explanation of Predictability Puzzles in Bond and Currency Markets,"
Review of Financial Studies,
vol. 26 (January), pp. 1–33.
Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Steven R. Grenadier (2010). "Stock and Bond Returns with Moody Investors,"
Journal of Empirical Finance,
vol. 17 (December), pp. 867–94.
Bernanke, Ben S. (2007a). "
Federal Reserve Communications
," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.
——— (2007b). "
Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting
," speech delivered at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019a). "
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019
," press release, August 21.
——— (2019b). "
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 17–18, 2019
," press release, October 9.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2017). "The Safe Assets Shortage Conundrum,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 31 (Summer), pp. 29–46.
Campbell, John Y., Carolin Pflueger, and Luis M. Viceira (forthcoming). "Macroeconomic Drivers of Bond and Equity Risks,"
Journal of Political Economy.
Campbell, John Y., Adi Sunderam, and Luis M. Viceira (2017). "Inflation Bets or Deflation Hedges? The Changing Risks of Nominal Bonds,"
Critical Finance Review,
vol. 6 (September), pp. 263–301.
Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio (2016). "Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism,"
European Economic Review,
vol. 88 (September), pp. 208–26.
Chen, Peter, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Brent Neiman (2017). "The Global Rise of Corporate Saving," NBER Working Paper Series 23133. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February (revised March 2017).
Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019).
"Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit" (PDF),
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Clarida, Richard (2019).
"The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination" (PDF)
, International Finance Discussion Papers 1244. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,"
Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661–1707.
——— (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 115 (February), pp 147–80.
Cohen, Benjamin H., Peter Hördahl, and Dora Xia (2018).
"Term Premia: Models and Some Stylized Facts" (PDF)
,
BIS Quarterly Review.
Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, September 23, pp. 79–91.
d'Addona, Stefano, and Axel H. Kind (2006). "International Stock-Bond Correlations in a Simple Affine Asset Pricing Model,"
Journal of Banking and Finance,
vol. 30 (October), pp. 2747–65.
Dao, Mai Chi, and Chiara Maggi (2018). "The Rise in Corporate Saving and Cash Holding in Advanced Economies: Aggregate and Firm Level Trends," IMF Working Papers WP/18/262. Washington: International Monetary Fund, December, available at
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2018/12/07/The-Rise-in-Corporate-Saving-and-Cash-Holding-in-Advanced-Economies-Aggregate-and-Firm-Level-46369
.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins (2017). "A Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation," NBER Working Paper Series 23093. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January (revised February 2017).
Eraker, Bjørn (2008). "Affine General Equilibrium Models,"
Management Science,
vol. 54 (December), pp. 2068–80.
Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018).
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy" (PDF)
, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Fischer, Stanley (2016a). "
Low Interest Rates
," speech delivered at the 40th Annual Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, October 5.
——— (2016b). "
Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Causes and Implications
," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, October 17.
——— (2017). "
The Low Level of Global Real Interest Rates
," speech delivered at the Conference to Celebrate Arminio Fraga's 60 Years, Casa das Garças, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, July 31.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018).
"Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?" (PDF)
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Fall, pp. 443–517.
Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016).
"Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics" (PDF)
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October
Gagnon, Joseph E. (2016).
"Quantitative Easing: An Underappreciated Success" (PDF)
, Policy Brief PB16-4. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, April.
Glick, Reuven (2019).
"R* and the Global Economy" (PDF)
, Working Paper Series 2019-18. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., and Jonathan H. Wright (2012). "Macroeconomics and the Term Structure,"
Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 50 (June), pp. 331–67.
Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 44 (s1, February), pp. 3–46.
Hills, Timothy S., Taisuke Nakata, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016).
"The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound" (PDF)
, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Hoek, Jasper J., Steven B. Kamin, and Emre Yoldas (2019). "When Is Bad News Good News? U.S. Monetary Policy, Macroeconomic News, and Financial Conditions in Emerging Markets," unpublished working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of International Finance, September.
Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,"
Journal of International Economics,
vol. 108, (s1, May), pp. S59–75.
International Monetary Fund (2018).
Global Financial Stability Report: A Bumpy Road Ahead
(PDF)
. Washington: IMF, April.
Jorda, Oscar, Katharina Knoll, Dmitry Kuvshinov, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2019). "The Rate of Return on Everything, 1870–2015,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 134 (August), pp. 1225–98.
Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017).
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World" (PDF)
,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
Spring, pp. 317–96
Kim, Don, Cait Walsh, and Min Wei (2019).
"Tips from TIPS: Update and Discussions" (PDF)
, FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 21.
Kuttner, Kenneth N. (2018). "Outside the Box: Unconventional Monetary Policy in the Great Recession and Beyond,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 32 (Fall), pp. 121–46.
Li, Canlin, and Min Wei (2013). "Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs,"
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 9 (March), pp. 3–39.
Nakov, Anton (2008). "Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate,"
International Journal of Central Banking,
vol. 4 (June), pp. 73–127.
Powell, Jerome H. (2018). "
Monetary Policy and Risk Management at a Time of Low Inflation and Low Unemployment
," speech delivered at the 60th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Boston, October 2.
Rachel, Łukasz, and Lawrence H. Summers (2019).
"On Falling Neutral Real Rates, Fiscal Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation" (PDF)
, paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Spring, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8.
Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 32 (November), pp. 936–66.
Romer, David (2010). "A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC,"
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
vol. 42 (August), pp. 951–57.
Summers, Lawrence H. (2015). "Have We Entered an Age of Secular Stagnation? IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer, Washington, D.C.,"
IMF Economic Review,
vol. 63 (1), pp. 277–280.
Swanson, Eric T. (2018). "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October.
Williams, John C. (2016).
"Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World" (PDF)
, FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August.
——— (2017).
"Three Questions on R-star" (PDF)
, FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-05. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February.
Yellen, Janet (2017). "
The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy
," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., January 19.
1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I would like to thank Vickie Chang, Stephanie Curcuru, Caitlin Dutta, Eric Engstrom, Don Kim, Jack McCoy, Andrew Meldrum, Katia Peneva, Marius Rodriguez, Beth Anne Wilson, and Emre Yoldas for their assistance in preparing this speech.
Return to text
2. Term premium estimates have been negative in the euro area and Japan for several years. See Cohen, Hördahl, and Xia (2018) and International Monetary Fund (2018).
Return to text
3. See, for instance, Fischer (2016a, 2016b, 2017) and Clarida (2019).
Return to text
4. Most papers—such as Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016); Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016); and Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins (2017)—estimate that demographics can explain between 1 and 2 percentage points of the decline in r*.
Return to text
5. See Williams (2016, 2017); Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017); Glick (2019); Chen, Karabarbounis, and Neiman (2017); and Dao and Maggi (2018) for a discussion of the potential drivers for the increase in the supply of savings and increased demand for safe assets. Other factors cited for lower real rates include low productivity growth (Rachel and Summers, 2019) and secular stagnation due to insufficient aggregate demand (Summers, 2015).
Return to text
6. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Clarida (2019); and Jorda and others (2019).
Return to text
7. This view has also long been shared by fellow monetary policymakers. See, for example, Bernanke (2007b) and Powell (2018).
Return to text
8. Gürkaynak and Wright (2012) provide a survey.
Return to text
9. For estimates of term premiums in other countries, see Cohen, Hördahl, and Xia (2018), and International Monetary Fund (2018).
Return to text
10. For recent reviews, see Kuttner (2018) and Gagnon (2016). Hamilton and Wu (2012) and Li and Wei (2013), among others, study the effects of the Fed's asset purchases in a term structure model setting.
Return to text
11. To elaborate a bit, this estimate of the implied decline in term premium may be on the larger side of estimates, because the term premium represents an expected average bond risk premium over the life of the bond and because the CAPM beta is expected to shrink as the bond's remaining time-to-maturity shrinks.
Return to text
12. See, for instance, d'Addona and Kind (2006); Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier (2010); Eraker (2008); and Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013).
Return to text
13. Hoek, Kamin, and Yoldas (2019) show that monetary policy actions that are interpreted as responses to rising inflation have more adverse spillovers to emerging markets than actions motivated by growth shocks.
Return to text
14. For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).
Return to text
15. Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework. They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.
Return to text
16. These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB. For related discussions, see Reifschneider and Williams (2000); Adam and Billi (2007); Nakov (2008); and Hills, Nakata, and Schmidt (2016).
Return to text
17. See Board of Governors (2019b).
Return to text
18. As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017). In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase household and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery. These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.
Return to text
19. Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication both to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions and to foster democratic accountability. These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; post-meeting press conferences; various statements about the principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections. Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannual
Monetary Policy Report.
With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon. Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members. For a discussion and data, see Bernanke (2007a) and Romer (2010).
Return to text
20. See Board of Governors (2019a).
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 95
==================================================
November 01, 2019
The United States, Japan, and the Global Economy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At the Japan Society, New York, New York
Share
Watch Live
I appreciate this opportunity to speak today at the Japan Society, a respected institution dedicated to studying, advocating, and expanding interactions between the United States and Japan.
1
While the society's remit is broad and includes arts, culture, and education, I will, perhaps not surprisingly, focus my remarks on our two economies. Japan is an important economic partner of the United States, and our economies are linked through trade in goods and services as well as capital flows that affect interest rates and other aspects of financial markets. Through these channels, developments in Japan can affect economic conditions in the United States, and vice versa.
More broadly, beyond bilateral linkages, economic conditions in United States and Japan are tightly linked to global economic developments, and today I will discuss several of the global factors that are relevant to the outlook for both economies. First, I will review the current U.S. outlook and some key global risks to that outlook that we are monitoring at the Federal Reserve. I will next elaborate on the channels through which global factors affect domestic economic conditions in the United States and, in some cases, also Japan. I will conclude with some remarks about the monetary policy decision we announced on Wednesday.
U.S. Outlook
By many metrics, the U.S. economy is in a good place. The current economic expansion, now in its 11th year, is the longest on record, and the economy continues to advance at a moderate pace, with real gross domestic product (GDP) growth running at 2 percent over the past year and 1.9 percent in the most recent quarter. Growth has been supported by the continued strength of household consumption, underpinned, in turn, by a thriving labor market. The unemployment rate is near a half-century low, real wages are rising, and workers who had earlier left the labor force are returning to find jobs. There is no sign that cost-push pressures are putting excessive upward force on price inflation, and to me, plausible estimates of the natural rate of unemployment extend from just above 4 percent to the current level. Core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation over the 12 months ending in September, at 1.7 percent, remains muted, and headline inflation, currently running at 1.3 percent, is likely this year to fall somewhat below our 2 percent objective. Price stability, as I see it, requires that inflation expectations as well as actual inflation be stable and consistent with our 2 percent inflation target. We do not directly observe inflation expectations, and I myself consult a wide range of survey and market estimates. Based on these estimates, I judge that measures of inflation expectations reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with price stability.
Although the baseline expectation for the U.S. economy is favorable, there are some evident downside risks to this outlook. Global growth has been sluggish since the middle of 2018. This slowdown in global growth as well as increased uncertainty about the outlook for global trade policy appear to be headwinds for manufacturing activity and investment spending in the United States and abroad.
2
Also another source of uncertainty in the global economy has been and continues to be Brexit. The global growth outlook also depends importantly on the strength and sustainability of continued economic expansion in China. China is balancing its desire to curtail credit growth and promote deleveraging against its understandable aspiration to maintain a rapid pace of economic growth in a country of 1.4 billion people. Finally, global disinflationary forces remain and present ongoing challenges to many central banks in their efforts to achieve and maintain price stability.
In sum, global conditions present headwinds for the U.S. outlook, and, as my colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve have emphasized, these headwinds have been a prominent consideration in our recent monetary policy assessments. I would now like to elaborate on some of the channels through which foreign developments more generally might be expected to affect the outlook for the U.S. economy.
3
Channels and Linkages
Perhaps the most direct link between economic conditions abroad and in the United States is foreign demand for U.S. exports. To be sure, exports account for a smaller share of the U.S. economy—about 12 percent—than the global average of about 30 percent. Even so, when foreign demand for U.S. exports falls, the effect on U.S. production is evident. The pace of economic expansion abroad is a key determinant of the demand for U.S. exports. Most recently, the International Monetary Fund projects foreign GDP growth in 2019 to have slowed to its weakest pace since the financial crisis. Largely as a result, real U.S. exports been about flat over the past year, an unusual development outside of recession. U.S. exports also have slowed as a result of a decline in exports to China following the imposition of tariffs on U.S. goods and also more recently because of production-related disruptions in aircraft deliveries.
The pace of economic growth in our major trading partners affects the demand for U.S. exports not only directly, but also indirectly by influencing the value of the dollar. When foreign growth weakens and central banks abroad ease monetary policy to support their domestic economies, returns on dollar assets appear relatively more attractive, capital flows into U.S. markets, and these flows will tend to boost the foreign exchange value of the dollar. In addition, elevated uncertainties about the global outlook and/or other evidence of financial stress abroad can also drive up the value of the dollar, as investors flow into the safe haven traditionally provided by U.S. assets. A stronger dollar, for either reason, makes U.S. exports more expensive for foreign buyers, makes U.S. imports from abroad more attractive to U.S. purchasers, and thereby tends to lower demand for U.S. goods and services. That being said, I would note that the value of the dollar does not appear to play much of a role in explaining the decline in U.S. exports over the past year. The current level of the trade-weighted dollar is about where it has been, on average, over the past few years. However, looking back several years, the 25 percent appreciation of the dollar that occurred in 2014 was an important contributing factor to the previous noticeable decline in U.S. exports that took place in 2015 and 2016.
Global financial markets also link the United States to the global economy, and developments abroad can spill over into domestic financial conditions, with material effects on domestic activity. This is particularly evident during episodes of global financial stress, in which "risk-off" shifts in sentiment can depress U.S. equity prices and widen domestic credit spreads even as flight-to-safety flows push down U.S. Treasury yields. These global financial spillovers to the U.S. economy were notably pronounced during the 1998 Russian crisis, the euro-area debt crisis earlier this decade, and the China devaluation episode of 2015–16. Recently, global financial spillovers have contributed to the significant decline in U.S. Treasury yields that we have seen since the spring. Since the market for debt is global, low—and, in many cases, negative—yields abroad encourage capital inflows that put downward pressure on U.S. yields. Equity prices have also reacted to global developments and recently appear particularly sensitive to news about the outlook for U.S. international trade. Global factors have likely also contributed to the estimated decline in the neutral rate of interest, or r*, that we have observed in the United States and many other countries. Slow productivity growth and population aging have lowered potential growth rates in major foreign economies, decreasing demand for investment and increasing desired saving, both of which have contributed to lower equilibrium interest rates abroad, with spillovers to the rest of the world, including in the United States.
4
Global developments influence not only U.S. economic activity and financial markets, but also U.S. inflation. Global factors—through their influences on U.S. aggregate demand and supply that I just described—can alter U.S. inflation dynamics. Foreign factors can also directly affect the prices paid by U.S. firms and consumers, particularly, but not exclusively, for imported goods. An appreciation of the dollar can lower the dollar price of U.S. imports, although empirically, this effect is less than one-for-one, as foreign exporters tend to keep the dollar prices of their goods comparatively stable relative to observed exchange rate fluctuations.
5
In addition, swings in global commodity prices influence U.S. inflation. Over the past year, the rise in the dollar and falling oil prices have been important contributors to the subdued pace of U.S. inflation.
Japan in the Global Economy
Up to now, I have focused on the U.S. economy. However, despite some important differences that I will note, the Japanese economy exhibits some notable similarities to the United States, both in terms of its overall performance and its exposure to the global economy. To begin with, Japanese growth, while slower than in the United States, has been running above the pace needed to absorb new entrants to the labor force, and its strong labor market is operating with an unemployment rate near multidecade lows at 2.2 percent. Also, as in the United States, weak exports have recently been a drag on Japanese growth. But, like the United States, Japan has been less exposed to the global slowdown than many other economies. Exports represent only 17 percent of Japanese GDP, higher than in the United States but well below the 30 percent global average I mentioned earlier.
In some respects, however, Japan is more strongly linked to the global economy than is the United States. One example is the relationship between episodes of global financial stress and the exchange rate. In times of stress, the dollar tends to appreciate as investors seek the safety of U.S. markets. The same is even more true for Japan, with the yen often recording even stronger appreciation than the dollar in times of increased risk aversion.
Other channels operate differently because of structural differences between the United States and Japan. One difference is in the currency used to invoice trade. In the United States, almost all trade, both imports and exports, is invoiced in dollars. One aspect of this, as mentioned earlier, is that changes in the value of the dollar tend to have a relatively limited effect on U.S. import prices and import demand. Despite the importance of the yen in global financial markets, a significant portion of Japan's trade is also invoiced in dollars rather than yen, including not only Japan's exports to the United States, but also its exports to other countries in Asia.
6
Some scholars have proposed that the importance of the dollar in Japan's trade lessens the responsiveness of Japan's exports to movements in the yen while making exports more sensitive to changes in the value of the dollar and, therefore, U.S. monetary conditions.
7
Regarding inflation, through the considerable efforts of the Bank of Japan's quantitative and qualitative monetary easing program launched in early 2013, Japan has emerged from almost 15 years of modest deflation and is now operating with a positive inflation rate. While the inflation remains below the Bank of Japan's long-run objective of 2 percent, it represents a notable accomplishment given the difficulty of changing public inflation expectations after a long period of modest deflation in consumer prices.
Conclusion
Returning to the United States, I would like to wrap up with a brief discussion of our monetary policy decision this week. At our meeting earlier this week, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, bringing the range to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent—the third such reduction this year.
8
As Chair Powell noted in his press conference, the Committee took these actions to help keep the U.S. economy strong in the face of global developments and to provide some insurance against ongoing risks. The policy adjustments we have made since last year are providing—and will continue to provide—meaningful support to the economy. The economy is in a good place, and monetary policy is in a good place.
The policy adjustments we have made to date will continue to provide significant support for the economy. Since monetary policy operates with a lag, the full effects of these adjustments on economic growth, the job market, and inflation will be realized over time. We see the current stance of monetary policy as likely to remain appropriate as long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with our outlook of moderate economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective. Of course, if developments emerge that cause a material reassessment of our outlook, we would respond accordingly. Policy is not on a preset course, and we will be monitoring the effects of our policy actions, along with other information bearing on the outlook, as we assess, at each future meeting, the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate.
Thank you very much for your time and attention and for the invitation to speak at the Japan Society this afternoon.
1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I would like to thank Joseph Gruber for his assistance in preparing this speech.
Return to text
2. Caldara and others find that increased trade policy uncertainty, independent of the actual effect of higher tariffs, can exert a significant negative drag on U.S. and global GDP. See Dario Caldara, Matteo Iacoviello, Patrick Molligo, Andrea Prestipino, and Andrea Raffo (2019), "
The Economic Effects of Trade Policy Uncertainty (PDF)
," International Finance Discussion Papers 1256 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).
Return to text
3. For further discussion, see Richard H. Clarida (2019), "
Global Shocks and the U.S. Economy
," speech delivered at the BDF Symposium and 34th SUERF Colloquium, sponsored by Banque de France and the European Money and Finance Forum, Paris, March 28.
Return to text
4. See Richard Clarida (2019), "
The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination (PDF)
," International Finance Discussion Papers 1244 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April). For one example highlighting demographics, see Etienne Gagnon, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016), "
Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).
Return to text
5. See José Manuel Campa and Linda S. Goldberg (2005), "Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import Prices,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 87 (November), pp. 679–90; and Christopher Gust, Sylvain Leduc, and Robert Vigfusson (2010), "Trade Integration, Competition, and the Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through,"
Journal of Monetary Economics
,
vol. 57 (April), pp. 309–24.
Return to text
6. See Takatoshi Ito, Satoshi Koibuchi, Kiyotaka Sato, and Junko Shimizu (2019), "
Growing Use of Local Currencies in Japanese Trade with Asian Countries: A New Puzzle of Invoicing Currency Choice
," Vox, June 10.
Return to text
7. See Gita Gopinath, Emine Boz, Camila Casas, Federico J. Diez, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Mikkel Plagborg-Møller (2019), "Dominant Currency Paradigm," NBER Working Paper Series 22943 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).
Return to text
8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "
Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement
," press release, October 30.
Return to text


Discurso 96
==================================================
October 18, 2019
U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida
At "Late Cycle Investing: Opportunity and Risk" Fixed-Income Management 2019, a conference sponsored by the CFA Institute and the CFA Society of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts
Share
Watch Live
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this CFA Institute conference on fixed-income management. Before we begin our conversation, I would like to share a few thoughts about the outlook for the U.S. economy and monetary policy.
1
The U.S. economy is in a good place, and the baseline outlook is favorable. The median expectation from Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' most recent Summary of Economic Projections is for GDP growth to be around 2 percent in 2019, for growth to continue near this pace next year, and for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation to rise gradually to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
2
The unemployment rate, at 3.5 percent, is at a half-century low, and wages are rising broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation. There is no evidence to date that a strong labor market is putting excessive cost-push pressure on price inflation.
But despite this favorable baseline outlook, the U.S. economy confronts some evident risks in this the 11th year of economic expansion. Business fixed investment has slowed notably since last year, exports are contracting on a year-over-year basis, and indicators of manufacturing activity are weakening. Global growth estimates continue to be marked down, and global disinflationary pressures cloud the outlook for U.S. inflation.
U.S. inflation remains muted. Over the 12 months through August, PCE inflation is running at 1.4 percent, and core PCE inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, is running at 1.8 percent.
Turning now to monetary policy, at both its July and September meetings, the FOMC voted to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points.
3
With these decisions, the current target range for the federal funds rate is 1.75 to 2 percent, which compares with the range of 2.25 to 2.5 percent that prevailed between December 2018 and July 2019. The Committee took these actions to provide a somewhat more accommodative policy in response to muted inflation pressures and the risks to the outlook I mentioned earlier.
Looking ahead, monetary policy is not on a preset course, and the Committee will proceed on a meeting-by-meeting basis to assess the economic outlook as well as the risks to the outlook, and it will act as appropriate to sustain growth, a strong labor market, and a return of inflation to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
Turning now to the framework under which the Federal Reserve operates in financial markets, in September of this year, shocks in the repurchase agreement (repo) market put upward pressure on money market rates, and these pressures spilled over into the federal funds market. In response to these developments, the Federal Reserve on September 17 initiated a program of repurchase operations to provide liquidity sufficient to keep the federal funds rate within the desired target range. These operations have been successful in achieving this goal.
As the FOMC announced in January 2019, the Committee seeks to operate with a level of bank reserves that is sufficiently ample to ensure that control of the federal funds rate is achieved primarily by the setting of our administered rates and is not, over the longer term, reliant on frequent and large open market operations.
4
In July, the FOMC concluded the program of balance sheet reduction in place since October 2017 and indicated then that, after a time, it would commence increasing its securities holdings to maintain reserves at a level consistent with an ample-reserves regime.
The FOMC announced on October 11 that it would seek to maintain, over time, a level of bank reserves at or somewhat above the level that prevailed in early September, a level that we believe is sufficient to operate an ample-reserves regime.
5
This week, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York began a program of purchasing Treasury bills in the secondary market. This program will continue at least into the second quarter of next year and is designed to achieve—and, over time, maintain—ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September. In addition, the Federal Reserve will continue to conduct term and overnight repo operations at least through January to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of temporary, but pronounced, increases in our nonreserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk that money market pressures adversely affect monetary policy implementation.
It is important to note that the open market operations we have announced are technical, "Central Banking 101" operations and should not be conflated with the large-scale asset purchase programs that the Federal Reserve deployed after the financial crisis. In those programs, the Federal Reserve was seeking to ease financial conditions by lowering term premiums via its purchases of long-term Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities. By contrast, the program announced on October 11 will concentrate its purchases in Treasury bills. The technical measures we are undertaking do not represent a change in the stance of monetary policy, which we continue to implement by adjusting the target range for the federal funds rate.
Finally, I would like to say a few words about the monetary policy framework review we are undertaking this year. This review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications is the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve. Public engagement, unprecedented in scope for the Fed, is an important part of this effort. Through our
Fed Listens
events, we have been hearing a diverse range of perspectives not only from academic experts, but also from representatives of consumer, labor, business, community, and other groups. We will draw on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability in the most robust fashion possible. In July, we began discussing issues associated with the review at our FOMC meetings. We will continue reporting on our discussions in the meeting minutes and share our conclusions when we finish the review during the first half of next year.
6
Thank you very much for your attention.
1.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.
Return to text
2.
The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is an addendum to the minutes of the September 2019 FOMC meeting. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 17–18, 2019
," press release, October 9.
Return to text
3.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "
Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement
," press release, July 31; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "
Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement
," press release, September 18.
Return to text
4.
See the
Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization
, which is available on the Board's website.
Return to text
5.
See the
Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation
, which can be found on the Board's website.
Return to text
6.
Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's
website
.
Return to text


Discurso 97
==================================================
October 09, 2019
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At a “Community Listening Session," a Fed Listens event at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri
Share
Watch Live
Good morning. I am happy to be here in Kansas City for the 13th of 14
Fed Listens
events. I look forward to hearing the perspectives of the community and business leaders participating today.
The Reserve Banks and the Board have been holding
Fed Listens
events around the country as part of a comprehensive and public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices. Almost all of the
Fed Listens
meetings, like this one, have been open to the press and live-streamed on the internet. Both the breadth and transparency of the review are unprecedented for us.
One reason we are conducting this review is that it is always a good practice for any organization to occasionally take a step back and ask if it could be doing its job more effectively. But we must pose that question not just to ourselves. Because Congress has granted the Federal Reserve significant protections from short-term political pressures, we have an obligation to clearly explain what we are doing and why. And we have an obligation to actively engage the people we serve so that they and their elected representatives can hold us accountable. We have invited you here because we want to better understand how monetary policy affects your lives and the lives of the people your organizations represent. We want to hear your perspective on maximum employment and price stability—the monetary policy goals Congress has assigned us.
Now is a good time to conduct the review. Unemployment is at a half-century low, and inflation is running close to, but a bit below, our 2 percent objective. While not everyone fully shares economic opportunities and the economy faces some risks, overall, it is—as I like to say—in a good place. Our job is to keep it there as long as possible. While we believe our strategy and tools have been and remain effective, the U.S. economy, like other advanced economies around the world, is facing some longer-term challenges—from low growth, low inflation, and low interest rates. While slow growth is obviously not good, you may be asking, "What's wrong with low inflation and low interest rates?" Low can be good, but when inflation—and, consequently, interest rates—are too low, the Fed and other central banks have less room to cut rates to support the economy during downturns.
So, in this review, we are examining strategies that might better allow us to symmetrically and sustainably achieve 2 percent inflation. Doing so would help prevent inflation expectations among consumers, businesses, and investors from slipping too low, as they appear to have done in several advanced economies. More-firmly anchored expectations, in a virtuous circle, would help keep actual inflation around our target, thus preserving our ability to change interest rates as appropriate to meet our mandate. We are also looking at whether our existing monetary policy tools will be adequate when the next downturn comes. Finally, we are asking whether our communications practices can be improved to better support the effectiveness of our policy.
After today, we have one
Fed Listens
session remaining, later this month in Chicago. At the July meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, my colleagues and I began discussing what we have learned so far from the
Fed Listens
events. We continued that discussion at our September meeting and have a lot left to do. We plan to publicly report our conclusions during the first half of next year.
One clear takeaway of the sessions so far is the importance of sustaining this historically strong job market. People from low- and moderate-income communities tell us that this long recovery, now in its 11th year, is benefiting them and their neighbors to a degree that has not been felt for many years. Employers are partnering with community colleges and nonprofit organizations to offer training. And people who have struggled to stay in the workforce in the past are getting new opportunities.
Once again, I'm happy to be here. Now it is your turn to speak. We're listening.
Related Content
Fed Listens


Discurso 98
==================================================
October 08, 2019
Data-Dependent Monetary Policy in an Evolving Economy
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At "Trucks and Terabytes: Integrating the 'Old' and 'New' Economies" 61st Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Denver, Colorado
Share
Thank you for this opportunity to speak at the 61st annual meeting of the National Association for Business Economics.
At the Fed, we like to say that monetary policy is data dependent. We say this to emphasize that policy is never on a preset course and will change as appropriate in response to incoming information. But that does not capture the breadth and depth of what data-dependent decisionmaking means to us. From its beginnings more than a century ago, the Federal Reserve has gone to great lengths to collect and rigorously analyze the best information to make sound decisions for the public we serve.
The topic of this meeting, "Trucks and Terabytes: Integrating the 'New' and 'Old' Economies," captures the essence of a major challenge for data-dependent policymaking. We must sort out in real time, as best we can, what the profound changes underway in the economy mean for issues such as the functioning of labor markets, the pace of productivity growth, and the forces driving inflation.
Of course, issues like these have always been with us. Indeed, 100 years ago, some of the first Fed policymakers recognized the need for more timely information on the rapidly evolving state of industry and decided to create and publish production indexes for the United States. Today I will pay tribute to the 100 years of dedicated—and often behind the scenes—work of those tracking change in the industrial landscape.
I will then turn to three challenges our dynamic economy is posing for policy at present: First, what would the consequences of a sharp rise in the price of oil be for the U.S. economy? This question, which never seems far from relevance, is again drawing our attention after recent events in the Persian Gulf. While the question is familiar, technological advances in the energy sector are rapidly changing our assessment of the answer.
Second, with terabytes of data increasingly competing with truckloads of goods in economic importance, what are the best ways to measure output and productivity? Put more provocatively, might the recent productivity slowdown be an artifact of antiquated measurement?
Third, how tight is the labor market? Given our mandate of maximum employment and price stability, this question is at the very core of our work. But answering it in real time in a dynamic economy as jobs are gained in one area but lost in others is remarkably challenging. In August, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) announced that job gains over the year through March were likely a half-million lower than previously reported. I will discuss how we are using big data to improve our grasp of the job market in the face of such revisions.
These three quite varied questions highlight the broad range of issues that currently come under the simple heading "data dependent." After exploring them, I will comment briefly on recent developments in money markets and on monetary policy.
A Century of Industrial Production
Our story of data dependence in the face of change begins when the Fed opened for business in 1914. World War I was breaking out in Europe, and over the next four years the war would fuel profound growth and transformation in the U.S. economy.
1
But you could not have seen this change in the gross national product data; the Department of Commerce did not publish those until 1942. The Census Bureau had been running a census of manufactures since 1905, but that came only every five years—an eternity in the rapidly changing economy. In need of more timely information, the Fed began creating and publishing a series of industrial output reports that soon evolved into industrial production indexes.
2
The indexes initially comprised 22 basic commodities, chosen in part because they covered the major industrial groups, but also for the practical reason that data were available with less than a one-month lag. The Fed's efforts were among the earliest in creating timely measures of aggregate production. Over the century of its existence, our industrial production team has remained at the frontier of economic measurement, using the most advanced techniques to monitor U.S. industry and nimbly track changes in production.
What Are the Consequences of an Oil Price Spike?
Let's turn now to the first question of the consequences of an oil price spike.
Figure 1
shows U.S. oil production since 1920. After rising fairly steadily through the early 1970s, production began a long period of gradual decline. By 2005, production was at about the same level as it had been 50 years earlier. Since then, remarkable advances in the technology for finding and extracting oil have led to a rapid increase in production to levels higher than ever before.
3
In 2018, the United States became the world's largest oil producer.
4
Oil exports have surged, imports have fallen (
figure 2
), and the U.S. Energy Information Administration projects that this month, for the first time in many decades, the United States will be a net exporter of oil.
5
As monetary policymakers, we closely monitor developments in oil markets because disruptions in these markets have played a role in several U.S. recessions and in the Great Inflation of the 1960s and 1970s. Traditionally, we assessed that a sharp rise in the price of oil would have a strong negative effect on consumers and businesses and, hence, on the U.S. economy. Today a higher oil price would still cause dislocations and hardship for many, but with exports and imports nearly balanced, the higher price paid by consumers is roughly offset by higher earnings of workers and firms in the U.S. oil industry. Moreover, because it is now easier to ramp up oil production, a sustained price rise can quickly boost output, providing a shock absorber in the face of supply disruptions. Thus, setting aside the effects of geopolitical uncertainty that may accompany higher oil prices, we now judge that a price spike would likely have nearly offsetting effects on U.S. gross domestic product (GDP).
How Should We Measure Output and Productivity?
Let's now turn to the second question of how to best measure output and productivity. While there are some subtleties in measuring oil output, we know how to count barrels of oil. Measuring the overall level of goods and services produced in the economy is fundamentally messier, because it requires adding apples and oranges—and automobiles and myriad other goods and services. The hard-working statisticians creating the official statistics regularly adapt the data sources and methods so that, insofar as possible, the measured data provide accurate indicators of the state of the economy. Periods of rapid change present particular challenges, and it can take time for the measurement system to adapt to fully and accurately reflect the changes in the economy.
The advance of technology has long presented measurement challenges. In 1987, Nobel Prize–winning economist Robert Solow quipped that "you can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics."
6
In the second half of the 1990s, this measurement puzzle was at the heart of monetary policymaking.
7
Chairman Alan Greenspan famously argued that the United States was experiencing the dawn of a new economy, and that potential and actual output were likely understated in official statistics. Where others saw capacity constraints and incipient inflation, Greenspan saw a productivity boom that would leave room for very low unemployment without inflation pressures. In light of the uncertainty it faced, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judged that the appropriate risk‑management approach called for refraining from interest rate increases unless and until there were clearer signs of rising inflation. Under this policy, unemployment fell near record lows without rising inflation, and later revisions to GDP measurement showed appreciably faster productivity growth.
8
This episode illustrates a key challenge to making data-dependent policy in real time: Good decisions require good data, but the data in hand are seldom as good as we would like. Sound decisionmaking therefore requires the application of good judgment and a healthy dose of risk management.
Productivity is again presenting a puzzle. Official statistics currently show productivity growth slowing significantly in recent years, with the growth in output per hour worked falling from more than 3 percent a year from 1995 to 2003 to less than half that pace since then.
9
Analysts are actively debating three alternative explanations for this apparent slowdown: First, the slowdown may be real and may persist indefinitely as productivity growth returns to more‑normal levels after a brief golden age.
10
Second, the slowdown may instead be a pause of the sort that often accompanies fundamental technological change, so that productivity gains from recent technology advances will appear over time as society adjusts.
11
Third, the slowdown may be overstated, perhaps greatly, because of measurement issues akin to those at work in the 1990s.
12
At this point, we cannot know which of these views may gain widespread acceptance, and monetary policy will play no significant role in how this puzzle is resolved. As in the late 1990s, however, we are carefully assessing the implications of possibly mismeasured productivity gains. Moreover, productivity growth seems to have moved up over the past year after a long period at very low levels; we do not know whether that welcome trend will be sustained.
Recent research suggests that current official statistics may understate productivity growth by missing a significant part of the growing value we derive from fast internet connections and smartphones. These technologies, which were just emerging 15 years ago, are now ubiquitous (
figure 3
). We can now be constantly connected to the accumulated knowledge of humankind and receive near instantaneous updates on the lives of friends far and wide. And, adding to the measurement challenge, many of these services are free, which is to say, not explicitly priced. How should we value the luxury of never needing to ask for directions? Or the peace and tranquility afforded by speedy resolution of those contentious arguments over the trivia of the moment?
Researchers have tried to answer these questions in various ways.
13
For example, Fed researchers have recently proposed a novel approach to measuring the value of services consumers derive from cellphones and other devices based on the volume of data flowing over those connections.
14
Taking their accounting at face value, GDP growth would have been about 1/2 percentage point higher since 2007, which is an appreciable change and would be very good news. Growth over the previous couple of decades would also have been about 1/4 percentage point higher as well, implying that measurement issues of this sort likely account for only part of the productivity slowdown in current statistics. Research in this area is at an early stage, but this example illustrates the depth of analysis supporting our data-dependent decisionmaking.
How Tight Is the Labor Market?
Let me now turn from the measurement issues raised by the information age to an issue that has long been at the center of monetary policymaking: How tight is the labor market? Answering this question is central to our outlook for both of our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. While this topic is always front and center in our thinking, I am raising it today to illustrate how we are using big data to inform policymaking.
Until recently, the official data showed job gains over the year through March 2019 of about 210,000 a month, which is far higher than necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force and thus hold the unemployment rate constant. In August, the BLS publicly previewed the benchmark data revision coming in February 2020, and the news was that job gains over this period were more like 170,000 per month—a meaningfully lower number that itself remains subject to revision. The pace of job gains is hard to pin down in real time largely because of the dynamism of our economy: Many new businesses open and others close every month, creating some jobs and ending others, and definitive data on this turnover arrive with a substantial lag. Thus, initial data are, in part, sophisticated guesses based on what is known as the birth–death model of firms.
Several years ago, we began a collaboration with the payroll processing firm ADP to construct a measure of payroll employment from their data set, which covers about 20 percent of the nation's private workforce and is available to us with a roughly one-week delay.
15
As described in a recent research paper, we constructed a measure that provides an independent read on payroll employment that complements the official statistics.
16
While experience is still limited with the new measure, we find promising evidence that it can refine our real-time picture of job gains. For example, in the first eight months of 2008, as the Great Recession was getting underway, the official monthly employment data showed total job losses of about 750,000 (
figure 4
). A later benchmark revision told a much bleaker story, with declines of about 1.5 million. Our new measure, had it been available in 2008, would have been much closer to the revised data, alerting us that the job situation might be considerably worse than the official data suggested.
17
We believe that the new measure may help us better understand job market conditions in real time. The preview of the BLS benchmark revision leaves average job gains over the year through March solidly above the pace required to accommodate growth in the workforce over that time, but where we had seen a booming job market, we now see more-moderate growth. The benchmark revision will not directly affect data for job gains since March, but experience with past revisions suggests that some part of the benchmark will likely carry forward. Thus, the currently reported job gains of 157,000 per month on average over the past three months may well be revised somewhat lower. Based on a range of data and analysis, including our new measure, we now judge that, even allowing for such a revision, job gains remain above the level required to provide jobs for new entrants to the jobs market over time. Of course, the pace of job gains is only one of many job market issues that figure into our assessment of how the economy is performing relative to our maximum-employment mandate and our assessment of any inflationary pressures arising in the job market.
What Does Data Dependence Mean at Present?
In summary, data dependence is, and always has been, at the heart of policymaking at the Federal Reserve. We are always seeking out new and better sources of information and refining our analysis of that information to keep us abreast of conditions as our economy constantly reinvents itself. Before wrapping up, I will discuss recent developments in money markets and the current stance of monetary policy.
Our influence on the financial conditions that affect employment and inflation is indirect. The Federal Reserve sets two overnight interest rates: the interest rate paid on banks' reserve balances and the rate on our reverse repurchase agreements. We use these two administered rates to keep a market-determined rate, the federal funds rate, within a target range set by the FOMC. We rely on financial markets to transmit these rates through a variety of channels to the rates paid by households and businesses—and to financial conditions more broadly.
In mid-September, an important channel in the transmission process—wholesale funding markets—exhibited unexpectedly intense volatility. Payments to meet corporate tax obligations and to purchase Treasury securities triggered notable liquidity pressures in money markets. Overnight interest rates spiked, and the effective federal funds rate briefly moved above the FOMC's target range. To counter these pressures, we began conducting temporary open market operations. These operations have kept the federal funds rate in the target range and alleviated money market strains more generally.
While a range of factors may have contributed to these developments, it is clear that without a sufficient quantity of reserves in the banking system, even routine increases in funding pressures can lead to outsized movements in money market interest rates. This volatility can impede the effective implementation of monetary policy, and we are addressing it. Indeed, my colleagues and I will soon announce measures to add to the supply of reserves over time. Consistent with a decision we made in January, our goal is to provide an ample supply of reserves to ensure that control of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily by setting our administered rates and not through frequent market interventions. Of course, we will not hesitate to conduct temporary operations if needed to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates within the target range.
Reserve balances are one among several items on the liability side of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, and demand for these liabilities—notably, currency in circulation—grows over time. Hence, increasing the supply of reserves or even maintaining a given level over time requires us to increase the size of our balance sheet. As we indicated in our March statement on balance sheet normalization, at some point, we will begin increasing our securities holdings to maintain an appropriate level of reserves.
18
That time is now upon us.
I want to emphasize that growth of our balance sheet for reserve management purposes should in no way be confused with the large-scale asset purchase programs that we deployed after the financial crisis. Neither the recent technical issues nor the purchases of Treasury bills we are contemplating to resolve them should materially affect the stance of monetary policy, to which I now turn.
Our goal in monetary policy is to promote maximum employment and stable prices, which we interpret as inflation running closely around our symmetric 2 percent objective. At present, the jobs and inflation pictures are favorable. Many indicators show a historically strong labor market, with solid job gains, the unemployment rate at half-century lows, and rising prime-age labor force participation. Wages are rising, especially for those with lower-paying jobs. Inflation is somewhat below our symmetric 2 percent objective but has been gradually firming over the past few months. FOMC participants continue to see a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective as most likely. Many outside forecasters agree.
But there are risks to this favorable outlook, principally from global developments. Growth around much of the world has weakened over the past year and a half, and uncertainties around trade, Brexit, and other issues pose risks to the outlook. As those factors have evolved, my colleagues and I have shifted our views about appropriate monetary policy toward a lower path for the federal funds rate and have lowered its target range by 50 basis points. We believe that our policy actions are providing support for the outlook. Looking ahead, policy is not on a preset course. The next FOMC meeting is several weeks away, and we will be carefully monitoring incoming information. We will be data dependent, assessing the outlook and risks to the outlook on a meeting-by-meeting basis. Taking all that into account, we will act as appropriate to support continued growth, a strong job market, and inflation moving back to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
References
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Avinash Collis, and Felix Eggers (2019). "Using Massive Online Choice Experiments to Measure Changes in Well-Being,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol. 116 (April), pp. 7250–55.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson (2018).
The Productivity J-Curve: How Intangibles Complement General Purpose Technologies
. NBER Working Paper Series 25148. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2010). "
Benchmark Article: BLS Establishment Estimates Revised to Incorporate March 2009 Benchmarks (PDF)
," February 23.
——— (2019). "
Introduction of Quarterly Birth/Death Model Updates in the Establishment Survey
," Current Employment Statistics, August 28.
Byrne, David M., and Carol Corrado (2019). "
Accounting for Innovations in Consumer Digital Services: IT Still Matters (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-049. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June.
Cajner, Tomaz, Leland D. Crane, Ryan A. Decker, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, and Christopher Kurz (2019). "
Improving the Accuracy of Economic Measurement with Multiple Data Sources: The Case of Payroll Employment Data (PDF)
," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-065. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
Decker, Ryan, Aaron Flaaen, and Maria Tito (2016). "
Unraveling the Oil Conundrum: Productivity Improvements and Cost Declines in the U.S. Shale Oil Industry
," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 22.
Fernald, John G. (2015). "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," in Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014,
vol. 29
.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press
,
pp. 1–51.
——— (2018). "Is Slow Productivity and Output Growth in Advanced Economies the New Normal?"
International Productivity Monitor,
no. 35 (Fall), pp. 138–48.
Gordon, Robert J. (2017).
The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Hatzius, Jan, Zach Pandl, Alec Phillips, David Mericle, Elad Pashtan, Daan Struyven, Karen Reichgott, and Avisha Thakkar (2016). "Productivity Paradox v2.0 Revisited,"
U.S. Economics Analyst,
Goldman Sachs Economics Research, September 2.
Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2008). "A Retrospective Look at the U.S. Productivity Growth Resurgence,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives,
vol. 22 (Winter), pp. 3–24.
Powell, Jerome H. (2018). "
Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy
," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–25.
Rockoff, Hugh (2004). "Until It's Over, Over There: The U.S. Economy in World War I," NBER Working Paper Series 10580. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June.
Seskin, Eugene P. (1999). "Improved Estimates of the National Income and Product Accounts for 1959–98: Results of the Comprehensive Revision,"
Survey of Current Business,
vol. 79 (December), pp. 15–43.
Solow, Robert M. (1987). "We'd Better Watch Out,"
New York Times Book Review,
July 12.
U.S. Department of Energy (2018). "
U.S. Becomes World's Largest Crude Oil Producer and Department of Energy Authorizes Short Term Natural Gas Exports
," press release, September 13.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2016).
Hydraulic Fracturing for Oil and Gas: Impacts from the Hydraulic Fracturing Water Cycle on Drinking Water Resources in the United States,
final report. Washington: EPA, December, available at
http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/hfstudy/recordisplay.cfm?deid=332990
.
1. Hugh Rockoff (2004) analyzes the change that accompanied a 44-month expansion starting in 1914.
Return to text
2. For more information on the history of industrial production reporting at the Board, see "Celebrating 100 Years of the Industrial Production Index" at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g17/100_years_of_ip_data.htm
.
Return to text
3. Decker, Flaaen, and Tito (2016) explore reasons for the resilience of production, even in light of declines in oil prices.
Return to text
4. Department of Energy (2018).
Return to text
5. The Energy Information Administration's Short-Term Energy Outlook (STEO; available at
https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/steo
), released on September 10, 2019, shows that the United States will become a net exporter of crude oil and liquid fuels by October 2019. A new STEO will be published today.
Return to text
6. Solow (1987).
Return to text
7. I discuss and document this episode more fully in Powell (2018).
Return to text
8. Revision and the role of high tech is described in Seskin (1999) and Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2008).
Return to text
9. Between 1995 and 2003, business-sector output per hour increased at an annual rate of 3.4 percent, and it has risen only 1.4 percent since then. Fernald (2015) suggests 2003 as a break point for the beginning of the productivity slowdown.
Return to text
10. See Gordon (2017) and Fernald (2018).
Return to text
11. Brynjolfsson, Rock, and Syverson (2018).
Return to text
12. Hatzius and others (2016).
Return to text
13. In the case of Facebook, Brynjolfsson, Collis, and Eggers (2019) found that the median user required compensation of $48 to live without that social media platform for a month.
Return to text
14. Byrne and Corrado (2019).
Return to text
15. This share is comparable to that covered in the sample used by the BLS, but the BLS sample is designed to be representative, while the ADP sample is simply their customer base.
Return to text
16. Cajner and others (2019).
Return to text
17. Any example about the details of data deserves detailed comment. Our ADP-based estimate showed job losses of about 1 million over this period, considerably more than the real-time BLS data but well short of the post-benchmark value. This episode motivated the BLS to revise their procedures in ways that will reduce the revisions in similar episodes in the future. See BLS (2019) for a technical note last updated in August and BLS (2010).
Return to text
18. See the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, which are available on the Board's website at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190320c.htm
.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version


Discurso 99
==================================================
October 07, 2019
Brief Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the premiere of "Marriner Eccles: Father of the Modern Federal Reserve," Salt Lake City, Utah
Share
Thank you, Randy, for the kind introduction. It is a great pleasure to join you all this morning for the premiere of KUED's documentary
Marriner Eccles: Father of the Modern Federal Reserve.
It is also a great pleasure to be in Utah. It has been a long time since a Fed Chair made an official visit to Utah. Alan Greenspan spoke in Salt Lake City 22 years ago. All of the Utahns here know about the Eccles family's enormous contributions to building the economies of the state and the region. The documentary will remind us of Marriner's immense contribution not just to the region, but also to our nation during the Great Depression, World War II, and thereafter.
Many Eccles family members are present here today. I would like to especially recognize Marriner's grandson, Chip Eccles; Marriner's nephew, Spencer Eccles; and Spencer's daughter, Hope Eccles. Randy was fortunate to marry Hope, and he has a second Federal Reserve connection. He is our Vice Chair for Supervision.
In a way, I feel that I know Marriner, too. I work in a building named after him. I sit in the office where he sat as Chair. And his portrait hangs in a room where I frequently meet with guests, Board colleagues, and staff. When I sit in my usual seat, he stands, looking over my left shoulder, an enigmatic expression—neither approving nor disapproving—on his face. Talk about pressure!
More seriously, his legacy endures in much more than a name on a building and a portrait on a wall. As the Depression deepened, he presciently recognized that the federal government should act forcefully to put people back to work and stimulate business. In a speech delivered here in Utah in 1932, Marriner asked what was the purpose of an economic system if not to allow those willing and able to work the opportunity to do so, to "guarantee to them sustenance for their families and protection against want and destitution."
1
His ideas helped form the basis of Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal and anticipated the not-yet-published tenets of British economist John Maynard Keynes. After World War II, he recognized, again presciently, that high inflation, not contraction, posed the principal threat to the U.S. economy.
And, perhaps most importantly from my perspective as Fed Chair, he is responsible more than any other person for the fact that the United States today has an independent central bank—a central bank able to make decisions in the long-term best interest of the economy, without regard to the political pressures of the moment. During his years on the Fed Board, Marriner played a crucial role in two landmark accomplishments that established the modern Federal Reserve—the Banking Act of 1935, near the start of his tenure at the Fed, and the Federal Reserve-Treasury Accord of 1951, at the end.
FDR nominated Marriner to lead the Fed Board in 1934. He accepted on the condition that Roosevelt support a restructuring of the Fed, which had failed to counter the contraction gripping the nation's economy. The result was the Banking Act of 1935, which significantly strengthened the structural independence of the Federal Reserve. And, symbolically important, it authorized the Board to move its meetings from the Treasury Department to a new building—the building that now bears Marriner's name—on Constitution Avenue, across from the Lincoln Memorial.
During World War II, the Fed effectively ceded control of monetary policy to the Treasury Department by agreeing to maintain a low interest rate peg on government bonds. The low rates helped the government finance the war, but after the war ended, inflation soared. It subsided for a time but, with the Korean War, spiked again. In 1951, Marriner led other Board members in precipitating a clean break with the peg arrangement, laying the foundation for the modern Fed. The Federal Reserve-Treasury Accord of that year separated government debt management from monetary policy and freed the Fed to combat high inflation and set short-term interest rates based on what was best for the economy.
Those are just the highlights of Marriner's Fed career. You will learn much more in the film we are about to see. In closing, I leave you with this statement from Marriner, inscribed on a plaque in the Eccles Building: "The management of the central bank must be absolutely free from the dangers of control by politics and by private interests, singly or combined."
1. See Marriner S. Eccles (1932), "
Depression: Its Causes, Effects and Suggested Remedies
," speech delivered at the Utah State Bankers Convention, June 17, Marriner S. Eccles Papers, FRASER, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, pp. 6–7.
Return to text


